the appellant's father purchased a house in the joint  names
of himself and his wife.  in 1954 the parents made a gift of
the said property to their two sons including the appellant.
the  document recited that the donees had accepted the  gift
and  they had been put in possession.  thereafter, the  sons
paid the municipal tax but the parents continued to  reside.
in  the  house and the father continued to  look  after  itsgeorge da costa vs controller of estate duty in ... on 28 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1946226/ 1affairs  as  head of the family.  the father died  in  1959,
more  than four years after the gift and the question  arose
in estate duty proceedings whether the said house was to  be
included  in the estate of the deceased for the  purpose  of
the  duty or not.  the assistant controller of  estate  duty
and  the  central  board  of  revenue  decided  against  the
appellant (who was the accountable per,son) and thereafter a
'reference  was  made to the high court.   that  court  also
having  given an adverse verdict the appellant came to  this
court.  it was contended on his behalf that the deceased had
no enforceable right against his sons and therefore s, 10 of
the estate duty act was not attracted to the case.
held  : the crux of s. 10 lies in two parts : (1) the  donee
must bona fide have assumed possession and enjoyment of  the
property  which  is, the subject-matter of the gift  to  the
exclusion  of the donor, immediately upon the gift, and  (2)
the  donee must have retained such possession and  enjoyment
of the property to the entire exclusion of the donor or  any
benefit  to  him  by  contract  or  otherwise.   both  these
conditions are cumulative.  unless each of them is satisfied
the  property would be liable to estate duty under s. 10  of
the act. [1007 g]
attorney-general  v. earl grey, [1898] 2 q.b.d. 534,  relied
on.
(ii)the  second part of s. 10 has two limbs : the  deceased
must  be  entirely excluded (i) from the property  and  (ii)
from  any  benefit  by  contract  or  otherwise.   the  word
'otherwise'  must be construed ejusdem generis and  must  be
interpreted  to mean some kind of legal obligation  or  some
transaction enforceable at law or equity which though not in
the  form of a contract may confer a benefit on  the  owner.
[1008 b]
but the words by contract or otherwise in the second limb of
the section will not control the words 'to the exclusion  of
the donor' in the first limb.  in other words to attract the
section it is not necessary that the possession of the donor
of  the gift must be referable to some contractual or  other
arrangement  enforceable in law or in equity.  even  if  the
donor  is content to rely upon the mere filial affection  of
his sons with a view to enable him to continue to reside  in
the  house it cannot be said that he was 'entirely  excluded
from possession and enjoyment' within the
1005
meaning of the first limb of the section, and therefore  the
property  will he deemed to have passed on the death of  the
donor and will be subject to the levy of estate duty.  [1008
e-g]
chick  v. commissioner of stamp duties of new  south  wales,
1958 a.c. 435 and commissioner of stamp duties of new  south
wales v. owens, 88 c.l.r. 67, relied on.
attorney-general  v. seccombe, [1911] 2 k.b.  688,  referred
to.
(iii)the  appellant  could not take  advantage  of  thegeorge da costa vs controller of estate duty in ... on 28 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1946226/ 2amendment  made  by the finance act, 1965 in s.  10   of  the
estate  duty  act, 1963.  the said amendment  was  effective
only from april 1, 1965 and was not retrospective.[1010 f]
(iv)it  was  the board's finding that though  the  property
stood  in the joint names of the deceased and his  wife  she
was  only a name-lender and the entire property belonged  to
the  deceased.  in view of this finding it was not  possible
to accept the argument of the appellant that only half share
of  the property should be taken for the purpose  of  estate
duty assistant. [1011 b]