there were two rival factions in a certain village one  con-
sisting  of  rajputs  and the other of  cultivators.   on  a
particular festival day both the groups went to a temple for
worship  and  cultivators  who  reached  the  temple   first
occupied  a  place  therein which was  usually  occupied  by
rajputs.   subsequently  rajputs arrived  and  resented  the
occupation  of the sitting place by the  cultivators.   they
shifted  to  a  short distance and  after  holding  a  brief
conference  came  back  to  the  temple  and  attacked   the
cultivators  with  guns, swords and lathis as  a  result  of
which  several persons were injured and two were killed.  43
persons  alleged to have taken part in the rioting were  put
up for trial before the sessions judge for having  committed
offences  under  s. 302 read with s. 149 and s. 148  of  the
indian  penal code.  the sessions judge held that  a  common
object  on the part of the accused to kill  the  cultivators
had  not  been  established and that it had  also  not  been
proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused were  guilty
of  a  particular offence.  on these findings  the  sessions
judge  acquitted all the accused.  on appeal the high  court
after  examining  the  entire evidence  found  some  of  the
accused guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to  murder
under s. 304 read with s. 149 and s. 148 of the indian penal
code  and sentenced them to various terms  of  imprisonment.
the appeal in respect of some other accused was dismissed as
no case had been made out against them beyond any reasonable
doubt on appeal by special leave against the conviction  and
sentence by the high court,
held,  that the words "substantial and  compelling  reasons"
for  setting aside an order of acquittal used by this  court
in  its decisions were intended to convey the idea  that  an
appellate  court shall not only bear in mind the  principles
laid  down  by the privy council in sheo swarup's  case  but
must  also  give  its  clear  reasons  for  coming  to   the
conclusion that the order of acquittal was wrong.
the following results emanate from a discussion of the  case
law on appeals against acquittal:-
(1)an  appellate  court  has  full  power  to  review  the
evidence  upon which the order of acquittal is founded;  (2)
the principles
121
laid  down in sheo swarup's case afford a correct guide  for
the  appellate court's approach to a case disposing of  such
an  appeal;  (3)  the  different  phraseology  used  in  the
judgments  of  this  court, such  as  (1)  "substantial  andsanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40914/ 2compelling  reasons",  (ii) "good  and  sufficiently  cogent
reasons",  and (iii) "strong reasons", are not  intended  to
curtail  the  undoubted power of an appellate court    in an
appeal  against acquittal to review the entire evidence  and
to come to its own conclusion, but in doing so it should not
only consider every matter on record having a bearing on the
questions  of fact and the reasons given by the court  below
in  support  of  its order of acquittal  in  arriving  at  a
conclusion on those facts, but should express the reasons in
its  judgment, which led it to hold that the  acquittal  was
not justified.
sheo swarup v. king emperor, (1934) l. r. 61 i. a. 398, con-
sidered and followed.
nur  mohammad  v. emperoy, a.i.r. 1945  p.c.  151,  surajpal
singh  v. the state, [1952] s.c.r. 193, ajmer singh  v.  the
state  of  punjab,  [1953] s.c.r` 418,  puran  v.  state  of
punjab,  a.i.r.  1953 s.c. 459, c. m.  narayan v.  state  of
travancore-cochin,  a.i.r. 1953 s.c. 478, tulsiram  kanu  v.
the  state,  a.i.r. 1954 s.c. 1, madan mohan  singh's  case,
a.i.r.  1954  s.c. 637, zwinglee ariel v. state  of  u.  p.,
a.i.r.  1954  s.c. 15, rao shiv bahadur singh  v.  state  of
vixdhya pradesh, a.i.r. 1954 s.c. 322, s.  a. a. biyabani v.
the state of madras, a.i. r. 1954 s.c. 645, aher raja  khima
v.  the state of saurashtra, [1955] 2 s.c.r.  1285,  bhagwan
das  v.  the state of rajasthan, a.i.r. 1957  s.c.  589  and
balbir  singh  v.  state of punjab, a.i.r.  1957  s.c.  216,
discussed.
the  high court approached the instant case from  a  correct
perspective and gave definite findings on a consideration of
the entire evidence, and in so doing it did not depart  from
any of the principles laid down by the privy council in sheo
swarup's  case  and also gave reasons for holding  that  the
acquittal was not justified.
abdul gani v. state of m. p., a.i.r. 1954 s.c. 31,  referred
to.
although  the  powers of this court under art.  136   of  the
constitution  are very wide, interference is  not  permitted
unless  "by disregard to the forms of legal process or  some
violation of the principles of natural justice or otherwise,
substantial and grave injustice has been done," on questions
of  fact  the  practice of this court is  not  to  interfere
except in exceptional cases when the finding is such that it
shocks the conscience of this court,