members  of a family held 4,015 shares, out of 4,391  shares
in  the  respondent  company, which  was  a  public  limited
company.  in the course of investigation under the  taxation
of income (investigation commission) act, 1947, the heads of
the various branches of the family admitted that the  shares
were  purchased by them out of their joint income which  had
not  been disclosed and that a majority of the  shares  were
held  benami.  an offer of settlement was also made  that  a
single  assessment may be made in respect of  the  "secreted
income" treating them as an association of persons and  that
every  member  of  the  family be  treated  as  jointly  and
severally  liable  to  pay  tax on  that  income.   for  the
assessment years 1950-51 and 1951-52, the income-tax officercommissioner of income-tax, west ... vs east coast commercial co. ltd on 11 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1697399/ 1commenced  proceedings under s. 23a of the  income-tax  act,
1922, and held that the company was one in which the  public
were not substantially interested and that its affairs  were
under  the control of the members of the family.  he  passed
an order under the section that the undistributed portion of
the assessable income of the company as computed for income-
tax  purposes  and reduced by the amount of  income-tax  and
super-tax  shall  be  deeming to have  been  distributed  as
dividends among the share-holders.  the order was  confirmed
by  the  appellate assistant commissioner.   the  income-tax
appellate  tribunal reversed the order.  the  tribunal  held
that  the  offers made by the members of the family  to  the
income-tax  investigation  commission were not  relevant  in
determining whether the company was one in which the  public
were  not substantially interested, and that from  the  fact
that  the members of the family held 4,015 shares, it  could
not  be inferred that the shares were jointly  acquired,  or
that  the members exercised control over the affairs of  the
company.   the  tribunal  also observed that  there  was  no
material  placed by the department to show that the  members
of  the  family actually controlled the voting or  acted  in
concert  so  as  to bring the company within  s.  23a.   the
tribunal, therefore, held that the section did not apply  to
the  company since it was not established that  the  company
was   one  in  which  the  public  were  not   substantially
interested, even though the members of the family held  more
than  75%  of  the  shares issued  by  the  company.   on  a
reference,  the  high  court  confirmed  the  order  of  the
tribunal  holding that even on the finding that the  members
of  the family were in a position to control the affairs  of
the  company, there was no evidence of any  overact  showing
that  they were acting in concert and thereby constituted  a
block.
in appeal to this court,
held : the approach to the problem by the tribunal and  high
court was erroneous.  it was for the tribunal to  determine,
having regard to ordinary human experience whether it may be
safely taken that the members of the family must have  acted
together as a controlling block.  that
822
enquiry  had not been made and the case was decided  on  the
application of an erroneous test. [830 c-d]
(i)  in  deciding whether an order under s. 23a (as  oh  the
relevant  date)  is called for, it must be  decided  in  the
first instance whether there was a of persons     acting  in
concert  holding a sufficient number of shares  may  control
the  voting as a block.  it is sufficient, if having  regard
to their relationship, their conduct, their common  interest
etc. it may be inferred that they must be acting together  :
evidence  of actual concerted acting is  normally  difficult
-to  obtain and is not insisted upon.  it is the holding  in
the  aggregate,  of a majority of the shares  issued,  by  a
person  or  persons  acting in concert in  relation  to  thecommissioner of income-tax, west ... vs east coast commercial co. ltd on 11 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1697399/ 2affairs of the company which establishes the existence of  a
block,  and  if the block holds 75% of the voting  power  it
shall be deemed that the company is one in which the  public
are  not  substantially  interested.  to  establish  that  a
company  is  one in which the public are  not  substantially
interested,,  it is not a condition that actual exercise  of
control by a group must be established. [828 b, e-f; 829  f-
h]
(ii) the  fact  that certain provisions of the  taxation  of
income (investigation commission) act were held to be  ultra
vires  did not render the commission an unlawful  body,  and
the  admissions  recorded  by the commission  could  not  be
ignored.  the report could be taken in evidence after giving
an opportunity to the respondent to make its  representation
against the report and to tender evidence against the  truth
of the recitals contained therein. [830 b-d]
raghuvanshi mills ltd. v. commissioner of income-tax, [1961]
2  s.c.r.  978  and commissioner of  income-tax  v.  jubilee
mills, [1963] supp. 1 s. c. r. 83, followed.