the first plaintiff was a society registered under the bihar
and orissa co-operative societies act, 1935, and the  second
plaintiff  was  its secretary.  the society had  an  account
with  the  first  defendant  bank.   the  6th  and  the  7th
defendants  were  the joint secretary and treasurer  of  the
society respectively, who were jointly authorised to operate
on the account.  a sum of rs. 11,000 was withdrawn from  the
account  by means of a cheque which did not come out of  the
cheque book of the society but which was a loose cheque form
surrendered by an ex-constituent of the bank.  the  spurious
cheque  bore  the  signature of the 7th  defendant  and  thebihta co-operative development ... vs the bank of bihar & ors on 12 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187706/ 1forged signature of the 6th defendant.  the suit against the
bank,  its  manager (the 2nd defendant) its  employees  (the
3rd,  4th  and 5th defendants) and ,defendants 6 and  7  was
decreed  against  defendants 1, 2, 4, 5 and  7  jointly.  on
appeal  by the 1st and 2nd defendants, the high court  found
in  favour of the plaintiffs-on the merits of the case,  but
dismissed  the suit on the ground that the  jurisdiction  of
the civil court was ousted by the combined operation of  ss.
48(9) and 57 of the act.
on  appeal to this court, the defendants sought  to  support
the judgment of the high court on the ground that the  words
in explanation (1) to s. 48(1) of the act must be understood
in  their  widest  amplitude, so that,  even  if  a  dispute
between  a registered society and a non-member did not  fall
within  any  of the categories 48(1) (a) to  (e),  it  would
still be within the purview of the section by reason of  the
explanation.
held:     the  judgment  of  the high court  should  be  set
aside. [858 a]
(i)  the  scheme  of  s.  48(1)  is  that  certain  disputes
touching  the  business of a registered  society  should  be
referred  to the registrar and not be taken to civil  courts
and made the subject matter of prolonged litigation.  before
the  act  was amended by bihar act 16 of  1948  disputes  in
which  a society might be involved with non-members  (except
as  sureties) were not within the section.   therefore,  the
explanation to the section as it then stood, made no mention
of non-members as such and only served to clear up the doubt
as to whether a dispute was referable to the registrar  when
the debt or demand was admitted and the only point at  issue
was  the  ability  to pay or the manner  of  enforcement  of
payment.   the amendment in 1948, introduced cl. (e)  in  s.
48(1) by which a dispute in which one of the disputants  was
not  a member of a society was also covered by the  section.
but only those non-members who bad disputes with a financing
bank   were  made  amenable  to  the  jurisdiction  of   the
registrar,  and  in the present case the society was  not  a
financing  bank.   therefore cl. (e) would not  apply.   nor
would the amended explanation apply, because the explanation
had  to include non-members after the insertion of  category
(e) in a. 48(1), but, by such inclusion, the explanation did
not  widen the scope of s. 48(1) so as to include claims  by
societies  against  all non-members ,even if they  were  not
included in cl. (e).  the explanation cannot be read
 849
as  adding a new head to the categories under s. 48 (1)  (a)
to  (e) of disputes which may be referred to the  registrar.
it  must be read only so as to harmonise with and  clear  up
any ambiguity in the main section. [854 b, e.h; 855 a-c]
sagauli  sugar  works (pw.) ltd. v. asstt.   registrar,  co-
operative  societies, motihari, [1962] supp. 3  s.c.r.  804,
followed.
(ii) because the signature of the 6th defendant was  forged,bihta co-operative development ... vs the bank of bihar & ors on 12 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187706/ 2there never was any mandate  by  the society  to  the  bank.
therefore,  there  was  no negligence on  the  part  of  the
society.  on the contrary, there was negligence on the  part
of  the bank in not ascertaining whether the  signatures  on
the cheque were genuine and the circumstances attending  the
encashment  of the cheque showed conclusively that the  bank
was negligent and some of its officers fraudulent [857 e-g]
london  joint  stock bank, ltd. v. macmillan,  [1918]   a.c.
777, referred to.