the petitioner  in his  three writ petitions under art.
32 challenged  the detention orders made against his father,
sister  and   brother  under  the  conservation  of  foreign
exchange and prevention of smuggling activities act 1974.
     on the  basis  of  intelligence  reports,  the  customs
officials searched  the room  of the  hotel where father and
daughter-venilal d. mehta and pragna mehta were staying. the
search led  to the  recovery of  60 gold biscuits of foreign
origin from  the suit  case belonging to the daughter. since
both of  them had  no valid  document to prove the nature or
import of the gold biscuits to..
698
india  and   for   their   legal   possession,   there   was
contravention of  the customs act, 1962 and the gold control
act, 1960,  and, therefore,  liable for  confiscation.  both
were arrested and statements recorded.
     in the  meanwhile bharat  mehta,  another  son  of  the
father, -detenu  who had  come from  calcutta to arrange for
bail was  arrested on 4th may 1984 by the central excise and
customs officials  after his room in the hotel, was searched
and indian  currency notes  amounting  to  rs.  24,865  were
seized, which he allegedly had brought for meeting the legal
expenses for  securing release  of his  father and sister on
bail. all  the three  were remanded  to jail  custody.  they
retracted their  statements made  before the  central excise
and customs  officers alleging  that they  were made  at the
dictates of the customs officers.
     pragna mehta  was served  with a  detention order under
the conservation  of  foreign  exchange  and  prevention  of
smuggling activities  act 1974  under  s.  3(1) (iii) on 20th
june 1984  and was  served with  the grounds of detention in
english  language.  hindi  translation  of  the  grounds  of
detention was  served on  30th june, 1984. venilal mehta and
his son bharat mehta were served with detention orders under
s. 3(1)  (iii) and (iv) of the act on 20th june, 1984 and on
1) 25th june, 1984 the grounds of detention were also served
on them.  the grounds  of detention were in english language
while some  of the accompanying documents were in malayalam.
the detenus made representations for the revocation of their
detention. they  appeared before  the advisory  board on 6th
august, 1984.  the advisory  board reported  that there  was
sufficient  cause   for  detention   of  the   detenus   and
accordingly the  govt. confirmed  their detention  orders on
13th august, 1984.
     all the  three detention  orders have  been  challenged
contending: (1)  that the  grounds were  not communicated to
the detenus  in a  language understood by them, (2) that the
retraction of  the confessions  or statements  made under s.
108 of  the customs  act,  1962  had  not  been  taken  intoprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 2consideration, (3)  that there  was  delay  in  serving  the
grounds upon  the detenus,  (4) that  the detenus  were  not
allowed to  be  represented  properly  before  the  advisory
board, (5)  that the  fact of  retraction of the confessions
having not  been taken  into consideration  the  proceedings
were vitiated,  and (6) that the detaining authority did not
independently consider  the representations  of the  detenus
but mechanically followed the advice of the advisory board.
     dismissing the petitions,
^
     held: 1.  the procedural  safeguards have been complied
with as  far as  practicable. there  are no  merits  in  the
fancied grievances of the detenus .[732]
     2. article  22 of  the constitution  ensures protection
against arrest  and detention  except in  certain prescribed
circumstances and conditions. art. 22(4)
699
stipulates that  no law  providing for  preventive detention
shall authorise  the   detention of  a person  for a  longer
period than  three months  unless  (a)  advisory  board  has
reported before  the expiration  of the said period of three
months that  there is  in its  opinion sufficient  cause for
such detention and (b) such person is detained in accordance
with the  provision of  any law made by the parliament under
sub-cls. (a) and (b) of cl. (7). [618d-g]
     clause (5)  of art.  22 provides  that the  grounds  of
detention must  be communicated to the detenu as soon as may
be and  that he  should be afforded the earliest opportunity
of making  a representation  against the order. there. fore,
it must  follow as  an imperative  that the  grounds must be
communicated in  a language understood by the person so that
he can make an effective representation. [719; 72013-c]
     harikisan v. the state of maharashtra & others, [1962]
 2 supp. scr 918. c
     in the instant case, the facts revealed that the detenu
vanilal mehta  was constantly  accompanied and  was  in  the
company of his daughter as well as his son-both of whom knew
english very  well. the  father signed his mercy petition in
gujrati which was written in english, accepting the guilt of
his involvement  in smuggling.  there is no rule of law that
common sense should be put in cold storage while considering
constitutional provisions  for safeguards  against misuse of
powers by authorities though these constitutional previsions
should be  strictly construed.  he was in any event given by
30th june 1984 the hindi translation of the grounds of which
he claimed ignorance. the gist of annexures which were given
in malayalam  language had  been stated in the grounds. that
he does  not know anything except gujrati  merely ipse dixit
of father  -detenu and is not the last word and the court is
not denuded  to its powers to examine the truth the court is
not the  place where  one can  sell all tales. the detaining
authority came  to the  conclusion that  he knew both  hindi
and english. it has been stated so in the counter-affidavit.prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 3the circumstances  indicate that  father -detenu  was merely
feigning ignorance of english
                                           [720c-h; 720 a-b]
     in the  instant case,  the grounds  were given  on 20th
june, 1984 following the search and seizure of gold biscuits
from room  of detenu  venilal mehta  in  the  hotel  in  his
presence and in the background or the mercy petition, he was
in constant touch with his daughter and sons and there is no
evidence that  these people  did not  know hindi or english.
indeed they  knew english  as well as hindi. it is difficult
to accept  the position  that in  the peculiar facts of this
case, the  grounds were  not communicated  in this sense the
grounds of  detention were  not  conveyed  to  the    detenu
venilal. whether  grounds were  communicated or  not  detenu
upon the fact and circumstances of each case. [712 d-f]
     hadibandhu das  v. district  magistrate, cuttack & anr.
[1969] 1  scr 227, nainmal partap mal shah v. union of india
and ors [1980] 4 scc 427 and ibrahim ahmad batti v. state of
gujrat & ors. [1983] 1  scr 540 distinguished.
700
     4 article  22(5)  of  the constitution  has two elements
(i) communication  of the  grounds on  which  the  order  of
detention has  been made  and  (ii)  opportunity  of  making
representation against the order of detention. communication
of the  grounds pre-supposes  the formulation of the grounds
and formulation  of the  ground  requires  and  ensures  the
application of  the mind  of the  detaining authority to the
facts and  materials before  it that  is to say to pertinent
and proximate  matters in regard to each individual case and
excludes the element of arbitrariness and automatism. [725e-
g]
     5. the "ground." under art 22(s) of the constitution do
not mean mere factual inferences but mean factual inferences
plus factual  material  which led to such factual inferences
the concept  of'grounds'.,  therefore'  has  to  receive  an
interpretation which  will keep it meaningfully in tune with
the contemporary notions of the realities of the society and
the purpose  of the act in question in the light of concepts
of liberty  and fundamental freedom guaranteed by art. 19(1)
21 and 22 of the constitution[725-h; 726 a-b]
     smt. shalini  soni etc. v. union of india & ors. [1981]
1 scr 962 relied upon.
     6. a  democratic constitution  is not to be interpreted
merely from  a lexicographer's  angle but with a realisation
that  it  is  an  embodiment  of  the  living  thoughts  and
aspiration of  a free  people. the concept of "grounds" used
in  the   context  of   detention  in   art.  22(5)  of  the
constitution and  in sub s. (3) of s.3 of cofeposa therefore
has  to   receive  an  interpretation  which  will  keep  it
meaningfully in  tune with  a contemporary notion. while the
expression "grounds"  for  that  matter  includes  not  only
conclusion of  facts but also all the "basic facts" on which
those conclusions  were founded,  they  are  different  fromprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 4subsidiary  facts   or  further  particulars  or  the  basic
facts.[726c-e]
     hasmukh s/o  bhagwanji m. patel v. the state of gujarat