the  union of india entered into two contracts  in  november
1944   and  june  1945  with  the  appellants,  which   were
subsequently  modified in february 1946, for the  supply  of
4,700  bins  at  an agreed price inclusive of  the  cost  of
steel.  the government undertook to make available the steel
required  for the manufacture of the bins and  accordingly,,
supplied to the appellants steel valued at rs. 2,53,521  for
which  amount  credit  was to be given  to  the  government.
after  2,172 bins had been manufactured and supplied to  the
union,  the latter cancelled the contract for the supply  of
the balance 2,528 bins.bungo steel furniture pvt. ltd vs union of india on 30 september, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/263196/ 1each  of  the  contracts between the  parties  contained  an
arbitration  clause and in accordance with  this  provision,
the dispute arising out of cancellation of the contracts was
referred  to an arbitrator.  the arbitrator found  that  the
contract had been wrongfully cancelled; and that at the time
of the cancellation the component parts of the balance 2,528
bins  were  ready but had not been assembled  into  finished
bins.   by way of compensation for the wrongful  termination
of  the contract by the government, the  arbitrator  awarded
damages to the company of the amount representing the  value
of  steel  used up in making the component  parts  for  bins
which  had  not been assembled into  completed  bins.   this
amounted to rs. 1,65,825.
the  government  made an application to  the  calcutta  high
court for setting aside the arbitrator's award on the ground
that there was a mistake of law apparent on the face of  the
award in the estimation of damages for wrongful  termination
of  the  contract.   a  single  judge  of  the  high   court
substantially confirmed the arbitrator's award.  the govern-
ment  took the matter in appeal to a division bench  of  the
high  court and the two appeals filed were allowed  by  that
bench and the award was set aside.
it  was contended on behalf of the appellants that the  high
court  could  not  have interfered with  the  award  of  the
arbitrator  as there was no error on the face of the  award;
that  the  arbitrator  was not bound to  give  -reasons  for
estimating  the damages to which the appellant was  entitled
and that he had not in fact given any such reasons.
held : allowing the appeal (per bhargava and raghubar dayal,
jj.).  the arbitrator in fixing the amount  of  compensation
had  not proceeded to follow any principles, the valdity  of
which  could  be tested on the basis of laws  applicable  to
breaches  of contract.  he awarded the compensation  to  the
extent  that he considered right in his  discretion  without
indicating  his reasons.  such a decision by  an  arbitrator
could not be held to be erroneous on the face of the record.
[642 a-b]
634
the  consideration that led the arbitrator to consider  that
the  value of the steel was equal to, and not more  or  less
than,  the amount which he considered it right to  award  as
compensation,  was not indicated by him in his award.   this
was, therefore, clearly a case where the arbitrator came  to
the conclusion that a certain amount, should be paid by  the
government  as compensation for wrongful termination of  the
contract, and in his discretion-he laid down that the amount
should  be  equal to the value of the steel  as  it  existed
after it had been converted into component parts. [641 f-g]
it is now a well settled principle that if an arbitrator, in
deciding  a dispute before him, does not record his  reasons
and does not indicate the principles of law on which he  has
proceeded, the award is not on that account vitiated.  it is
only when the arbitrator proceeds to give his reasons or  tobungo steel furniture pvt. ltd vs union of india on 30 september, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/263196/ 2lay down principles on which he has arrived at his decisions
that the court is competent   to  examine  whether  he   has
proceeded contrary to law and is entitled    to interfere if
such  error  in  law is apparent on the face  of  the  award
itself. [640 h]
(per  ramaswami  j.,  dissenting)-in the  present  case  the
arbitrator   had  estimated  the  measure  of   damages   as
equivalent  to  the  value of steel used up  in  making  the
component parts.  that was the legal proposition upon  which
he  had  based his award and the question was  whether  that
legal  proposition  was correct.  the arbitrator  had  found
that  the appellant had produced no evidence with regard  to
the  manufacturing cost of the component parts of the  2,528
unfinished  bins;  he  had therefore  failed  to  prove  the
resultant damage on account of the breach of contract.   but
if in spite of this finding the arbitrator decided to  award
damages to the appellant, the highest amount which he  could
award would be rs. 1,03,066, which is the difference between
the  contract  price and the value of the steel used  up  in
manufacturing  their  component  parts.   the  estimate   of
damages at this figure is based, on the assumption that  the
appellant  had manufactured completely 2,528 bins  according
to  the terms of the contract.  the arbitrator  had  ignored
the  provisions of s. 73 of the indian contract act and  had
awarded  damages  to the appellant on a wrong  legal  basis.
the award was therefore vitiated by an error of law apparent
on the face of it. [639 c, g, h] .
champsey bhara and co. v. jivraj balloo spinning and weaving
co. ltd. 50 i.a. 324 and james clark (brush materials)  ltd.
v.   -carters   (merchants)   ltd.  [1944]   1   k.b.   566,
distinguished.