the  income-tax officer, while assessing the  respondent  to
tax   discovered   an  undisclosed  bank  account   of   the
'respondent  for  a  large  sum.   he  did  not  accept  the
explanation of the respondent as to the source of the amount
and  held  that it represented income  from  an  undisclosed
source.   thereafter he initiated penalty proceedings  under
s.  28  and  imposed a penalty which was  confirmed  by  the
appellate  assistant commissioner.  in appeal, the  tribunal
held that penalty proceedings were of a criminal nature  and
that  the  burden  lay on the department to  show  that  thecommissioner of income tax west ... vs anwar ali on 29 april, 1970
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1629738/ 1amount concealed was of a revenue nature and was  assessable
as  income  and  that the onus was  not  discharged  in  the
present   case  by  merely  showing  that   the   assessee's
explanation was not accepted in the assessment  proceedings.
the high court agreed with the tribunal.
in appeal to this court,
held. (1) penalty proceedings are included in the expression
"assessment"  and  the  true  nature of  a  penalty  is  the
imposition of an additional tax.  but, one of the  principal
objects  of  s.  28   is  to  provide  a  deterrent   against
recurrence  of default on the part of the assessee.   there-
fore,  the section is a penal provision and the  proceedings
were of a penal nature. [450 b-c]
c.   a. abraham v. income-tax officer, 41 i.t.r. 425 (s.c.),
explained. commissioner of income-tax, ahmedabad v. gokuldas
harivallabhdas
34 i.t.r. 98,  commissioner of income-tax gujarat v.  l.  h.
vora, 56 i.t.r. 126 and commissioner of income tax bihar and
orissa v. mohan mallah, 54    i.t.r. 499, approved.
moman     rain  ram  kumar v.  commissioner  of  income-tax,
u.p., 59 i.t.r. 135 and lal chand gopal das v.  commissioner
of income-tax, u.p., 48 i.t.r. 324, not approved.
hindustan  steel  ltd. v. state of orissa, c.as.  nos.  883-
892/66  dt.  4-8-1969 and fattorini  (thomas)  (lanchashire)
ltd.  v.  inland revenue commissioner,  (1943)  (11)  i.t.r.
supp. 50, referred to.
(2)the  gist  of the offence under s. 28(1)(c) is  that  the
assessee  has  concealed the particulars of  his  income  or
deliberately   furnished  inaccurate  particulars  of   such
income,  and therefore, the department must  establish  that
the  receipt of the amount in dispute constitutes income  of
the assessee.  if there is no evidence on the record  except
the  explanation  has been found to be false,  if  does  not
follow that the receipt constitutes his taxable income. [450
e-g]
                            447
commissioner    of,   income-tax,    ahmedabad    v.gokuldas
harivallabhdas, 34 i.t.r. 98, approved.
(3)'since the proceedings under s. 28 are of a penal  nature
and  the  burden  is  on the  department  to  prove  that  a
particular amount is a revenue receipt, the finding given in
the  assessment proceedings that the assessee's  explanation
is  false and that the disputed amount represents income  is
evidence  but  is not conclusive.  before penalty  could  be
imposed the, entirety of circumstances must reasonably point
to  the  conclusion  that the  disputed  amount  represented
income  and that the assesses , had  consciously.  concealed
the particulars of his income or had deliberately  furnished
inaccurate particulars. [450-451 a-c]