the  assesses firm which carried on business at  calcutta
in bullion despatched during the accounting year to bikaner,
where  its  partners resided, a certain quantity  of  silver
bars  and showed them a,; having been sold to the  partners.
the income-tax authorities disbelieved the story of the sale
and, treating the bars as stock-in-trade and valuing them at
their  market value at the close of the year which was  much
higher  than  the cost, assessed the firm's profits  at  rs.
2,20,887.  the assessee contended that, even admitting  that
the  bars  were  the stock-in-trade  of  the  business,  thechainrup sampatram vs commissioner of income-tax,west ... on 9 october, 1953
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127231/ 1increased value at the close of the year accrued at  bikaner
and  was exempt from tax in british india under s.  14(2)(c)
of  the  income-tax  act.   the high  court  held  that  the
notional  profit representing the appreciation in  value  of
the  stock-in-trade  emerged out of the  valuation  and  the
profit accordingly arose at the time when, and at the  place
where, the valuation was made, and as the valuation was made
at  calcutta  s. 14(2)(c) did not apply and the  profit  was
taxable.  on appeal,
212
held, that the view of the high court that the profit  &rose
out  of the valuation of the closing stock and the situs  of
its accrual or arising was therefore where the valuation was
made, was erroneous.  the conclusion of the high court  that
the profit did not accrue in bikaner but at calcutta  could,
however,  be  supported on another ground,  viz.,  that  the
source  of  the profit was the business and  as  the  profit
could  be  correctly  ascertained according  to  the  method
adopted by the assessee only after bringing into the trading
account  his closing stock wherever it may exist, the  whole
of the profits must be taken to accrue or arise at the place
of carrying on the business, viz., calcutta,
  the  principles  underlying the  method  of  ascertaining
profits by valuation of stock at the beginning and close  of
the  year  and of the rule that the closing stock is  to  be
valued  at  cost or market value, whichever  is  the  lower,
explained.
whimstar  and co. v. commissioners of inland revenue  (12
tax  cas.  813) and commissioner of  income-tax,  madras  v.
chengalvaraya chetty (i.l.r. 48 mad. 836) referred to.