the  assessee, former maharaja of darbhanga filed  a  return
for the assessment year 1957-58 declaring his net wealth  of
more  than two and half crores.  a revised return was  filed
subsequently  showing  a  lesser  amount.   the   wealth-tax
officer determined the net wealth of the assessee to be more
than four and half crores.
the  assessee held shares and stocks in  various  companies.
the  assessee  gave correct valuation of  those  shares  but
claimed a deduction of more than 2 lakhs by way of brokerage
which he would have to pay it those shares were sold in  the
open  market.  further, the assessee claimed deduction  from
the net wealth of the value of jewelry intended for personalashoka kumar thakur vs union of india & ors on 10 april, 2008
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1566960/ 1use.   thirdly, the assessee claimed deduction of more  than
36  lakhs, payable to him as compensation by the  government
for  acquiring his zamindari estate, on the ground  that  it
was not known as to when and in what manner the amount would
be paid.
the  wealth-tax  officer rejected all his claims  and  after
estimating  the value of compensation to be 75 per  cent  of
its face value, rs. 27,65,564 was added to the total  wealth
of the assessee.
on appeal, the appellate assistant commissioner affirmed the
decision  of  the  wealth-tax officer.   the  tribunal  also
rejected the claims of the assessee so far as the  brokerage
commission and the jewelry was concerned.  it 'further  held
that  the valuation of the bonds should be determined to  be
65  per cent of the face value.  on a reference to the  high
court,  all  three  questions  were  answered  against   the
assessee.   on  appeal before this court.  all  those  three
points were raised.
partly allowing the appeal
held  :  (i)  as  regards  the  question  relating  to   the
jewelry,  it  was  decided in commissioner  of  wealth  tax,
gujarat v. arundhati balkrishna, [1970] 77, i.t.r. 505, that
section  5(1)(xv)  dealt  with jewelry  in  general  whether
intended  for  personal use of the assessee  or  not.  while
jewelry  intended  for  personal use of  the  assessee  came
within  the scope of section 6(1)(viii) of the act.  it  was
accordingly  held that the value of jewelry of the  assessee
intended  for  personal  use of  the  assessee  would  stand
excluded under section 5(1) (viii) of the act in computation
of the net wealth of the assessee.  in the present case,  in
absence  of any plea that the jewelry was not  intended  for
the   assessee's  personal  use,  and  in  absence  of   any
retrospective operation of the finance act of 1971 excluding
jewelry  from the purview of cl.  viii of sec. 5(1)  of  the
act, the value of the jewelry for his personal use will  not
be included in the net wealth of the assessee. [977d]
(ii)regarding brokerage commission section 7(1) of the  act
provides  that subject to any rule made in this behalf,  the
value of any asset shall be
974
estimated  to  be  the price which in  the  opinion  of  the
wealth-tax  officer would fetch if sold in the open  market.
there  is  nothing in the language of sec. 7(1) of  the  act
which  permits any deduction on account of the  expenses  of
sale  which  may  be  borne  by  the  assessee.   the  value
according to sec.' 7(1) has to be the price which the  asset
would  fetch if sold in the open market.  therefore, so  far
as the construction of sec. 7(i) of the act is concerned, in
view  of its plain language, there is no scope of  excluding
the  expenses of sale of the asset from the price which  the
asset would fetch if sold in the open market. [980c, d]
duke  of  buccleuch v. indian revenue  commissioner,  [1967]
a.c. 506, referred to.ashoka kumar thakur vs union of india & ors on 10 april, 2008
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1566960/ 2(iii)as   regards   inclusion   of   the   compensation
receivable by the assesseefrom   the  government,   sec.
32(2) of the bihar land reforms act, 1950provides   that
the   amount   of  compensation  payable  in  terms   of   a
compensation  assessment-roll  shall be paid in cash  or  in
bonds or partly in cash and partly in bonds.  therefore,  as
soon  as the estate vests in the state, the proprietor or  a
tenure-bolder  has  the right to get compensation  and  this
right  to  get  compensation  comes  under  the   definition
"assets"  as  given in section 2(e) of the wealth  tax  act.
[982d-e, 983 d]
maharajkumar  kamal  singh v. commissioner  of  wealth  tax,
[1967] 65 i.t.r. 460, referred to.
(iv)as  would  appear from the order of the  tribunal,  the
value of ,compensation payable under the bihar land  reforms
act  has been estimated for the purpose of wealth-tax to  be
65 per cent of the amount of compensation determined.  there
is no cogent ground to interfere in this regard. [986a]
commissioner  of  wealth  tax v. u. c.  mahatab,  [1970]  78
i.t.r. 214, discussed and distinguished.