by a deed executed in november 1946, the respondent and  her
husband created a trust in respect of their properties.   in
accordance  with  clause 7 of the deed, the  income  of  the
trust properties was to be paid to the respondent during her
lifetime  and,  by clause 8 the trustees  were  directed  to
apply   the  income,  from  and  after  the  death  of   the
respondent, to certain charitable purposes enumerated in the
deed.   on july 21, 1955, the respondent executed a deed  of
surrender whereby she gave up her beneficial interest in the
income  of the trust so that it may immediately vest in  the
trustees  and  may be utilised for the  charitable  purposes
mentioned in the trust deed.
in the course of assessment to income tax in respect of  thethe commissioner of income-tax, ... vs smt. kasturbai walchand trust, ... on 31 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/770671/ 1income  from the trust properties for the  assessment  years
1956-57  to 1959-60, it was claimed on behalf of  the  trust
that during the relevant previous years, the properties were
held  under  a  trust wholly for  charitable  purposes,  and
consequently, the income was exempt from income-tax under s.
4(3)(i) of the income tax act, 1922.  the income tax officer
rejected  this claim on the view that the deed of  surrender
executed by the respondent did not amount to renouncement of
her rights under the trust deed and that it really  amounted
to  a transfer of the income received by her for the use  of
the  trust;  and  since the income  was  receivable  by  the
respondent,  the trust properties were not held  wholly  for
charitable  purposes.   however,. the:  appellate  assistant
commissioner, on appeal held that the income from the  trust
properties  was  exempt under s. 4(3)(i) and this  view  was
upheld  by the tribunal.  the high court, upon a  reference,
also held in favour of the trust.
it  was also contended on behalf of the department  that  as
clause  8  of  the  trust deed  executed  in  november  1946
provided that the income of the trust was to be applied  for
charitable  purposes  "from  and after  the  death"  of  the
respondent  the  trustees could not, during  her  life-time,
apply  the income for any charitable purposes and  therefore
no exemption could be claimed under s, 4(3) (i).
held:the  income from the trust properties -after  july
21, 1955 was exempt from tax under s. 4(3) (i). [ 1 3 b-c]
whenever  a valid trust is executed, the property  vests  in
the trustees, and the income accruing from those  properties
is  the  income of the trust and not of  the  beneficiaries.
for purposes of income-tax law, however, the income under s.
41(1)  of the act is treated as received by the trustees  on
behalf of the beneficiaries, but is to be taxed in the hands
of  the  trustees  as  it  would be  in  the  hands  of  the
beneficary for whom it is
8
received.  in the present case, therefore, it would be wrong
to  proceed on any assumption that the income of  the  trust
properties  was  received  by  the  respondent.   once   the
respondent renounced her interest by the deed of july  1955,
which  was  clearly  valid in view of s. 58  of  the  indian
trusts act, the entire properties were held by the  trustees
for  the charitable purpose mentioned in clause  8,  because
that was the only purpose of the trust which then  remained.
the income which accrued thereafter was come which could  be
applied  or  allowed to accumulate for  application  to  the
charitable  purposes mentioned in clause 8 and for no  other
purpose. [10 e; 11 b-h]
even  if it were to be held that by virtue of clause  8  the
trustees could not apply the income for charitable  purposes
so  long as the respondent was alive, the only effect  would
be  that  the income would accumulate.   such  accumulations
would also be exempt from the liability to income-tax  under
s.  4(3) (i) as soon as the rights of the respondent  ceasedthe commissioner of income-tax, ... vs smt. kasturbai walchand trust, ... on 31 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/770671/ 2on  the  execution by her of the deed of surrender  in  july
1955. [12 f-]