the respondent had been carrying on business in the  produc-
tion  and  supply  of limestone since  1920,  and  under  an
agreement  entered  into with the bengal  iron  company  was
supplying  all its requirements of limestone  and  dolomite.
sometime  later the indian iron and steel company took  overcommissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 1all  the  assets  and liabilities  of  the  former  company.
subsequently   differences   having   arisen   between   the
respondent  and  the  indian iron  and  steel  company  they
entered  into an agreement on may 9, 1940, in settlement  of
all  the  disputes  between them whereby,  inter  alia,  the
respondent was to work a quarry of the company for a  period
of  25 years and to supply the limestone quarried  therefrom
to the company according to its requirements and to get from
the  railway  authorities facilities  for  transporting  the
limestone  more  economically; and it was agreed  that  till
such  facilities were given, the respondent was to  be  paid
rs. 4000/- every month.  under the agreement the  respondent
had  the right to work other quarries of his own and  supply
limestone  so  quarried to other  purchasers.   the  railway
authorities  having declined to grant facilities, it  became
impossible  to  carry  out  the  agreement  in  the   manner
contemplated by the parties, who, thereupon, entered into  a
fresh agreement on august 2, 1941, terminating
111
the  agreement  dated may 9, 1940, on  certain  terms.   the
agreement  provided inter alia (1) that the  company  should
pay " rs. 2,50,000/- to the sellers as solatium besides  the
monthly  instalments of rs. 4000/-", remaining unpaid  under
the contract dated may 9, 1940, (2) that the company  should
purchase  limestone from the respondent for a period  of  12
years,  and (3) that the respondent was to be appointed  the
loading contractors of the company for loading iron ore.  on
a  question as to whether the the sum of rs. 2,50,000/-  was
liable  to  tax,  the respondent claimed that  it  was  not,
'being a capital receipt but the income-tax authorities held
that  it was a trading receipt and was income chargeable  to
tax.   the high court however held on a reference  under  s.
66(1), that the income was not chargeable to tax, and  hence
the  present appeal.  in support of the appeal, the  respon-
dent contended inter alia that (1) the contract dated may 9,
1940,  was  for a period of 25 years of which more  than  23
years had still to run at the time of the settlement, and it
was therefore an asset of an enduring character, capital  in
character, and the compensation paid therefor was a  capital
receipt,  and (2) that the true character of  the  agreement
was  that  it brought into existence  an  arrangement  which
would  enable the respondent to carry on a business and  was
not  itself  any  business, and any  payment  made  for  the
termination of such an agreement was a capital receipt.
held, that the contract of may 9, 1940, was entered into  by
the  respondent in the ordinary course of his  business  and
that  the sum of rs. 2,50,000/- which was paid  as  solatium
for the cancellation of that contract, was a revenue receipt
and was chargeable to tax.
there  is a distinction between a contract entered  into  in
the usual course of business and an agency contract.   while
it  may  be  possible  to regard  the  latter  as  merely  a
framework  for  doing business, the former  constitutes  thecommissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 2business  itself, and, therefore, compensation paid for  the
termination  of the former kind of contract must be held  to
be revenue, whereas compensation paid for the termination of
the latter might be capital in character.
it would make no difference in the character of the receipt,
when  it  is  compensation for  cancellation  of  a  trading
contract, whether its performance is to consist of a  single
act or a series of acts spread over a period.
case law reviewed.
van   den   berghs   ltd.  v.  clark,   [1935]   a.c.   431,
distinguished.