the  assessee-companies, carried on business in madurai  and
each  had  a branch at pudukottai, a  former  native  state.
they hold majority share in a bank which, too, had its  head
office  at madurai and branch at pudukottai.  t, who  was  a
shareholder  of  the  bank, was the  moving  figure  in  the
assessee-companies.  the assessees borrowed moneys from  the
madurai  head  office of the bank on the security  of  fixed
deposits made by the assessees' branches with the pudukottai
branch  of  the bank.  the loans were far in excess  of  the
available  profits  at pudukottai.  the  income-tax  officer
held that the borrowings in british india on the security of
the   fixed   deposits  made  at  pudukottai   amounted   tothe commissioner of income-tax, ... vs sri meenakshi mills ltd. & ors on 25 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/503166/ 1constructive  remittance of the profits by the  branches  of
the assessee-companies to their head office in india  within
the meaning of s. 4 of the income-tax act, and this view the
appellate  assistant  commissioner  upheld.   the  assessees
appealed  to  the trbunal which took note  that  the  branch
whether  of  the assessee of the bank constituted  only  one
unit,  and  the establishment of the branch of the  bank  at
pudukottai was intended to help the financial operations  of
t  in  the  concerns in which he was  interested.,  and  the
pudukottai   branch  of  the  bank  had  transmitted   funds
deposited  by the assessees for enabling the madurai  branch
to  advance  loans  at interest to  the  assessees  and  the
transmission  of  the funds was made with the  knowledge  of
assessees.   the  tribunal  held  that  the  assessees  were
rightly assessed.  in reference the high court answered  the
question  in  favour  of the assessees holding  it  was  not
established  that  there  was any  arrangement  between  the
assessees  and the bank whether at pudukottai or at  madurai
for transference of moneys from pudukottai branch to madurai
and the facts on record did not establish that there was any
transfer  of  funds between pudukottai and madurai  for  the
purpose  of  advancing  moneys to  the  assessees,  and  the
transactions  represented ordinary banking transactions  and
there  was nothing to show that the amounts placed in  fixed
deposits  in  the branch were intended to and were  in  fact
transferred  to head office for the purpose of lending  them
out  to  the depositor himself.  in appeals by  the  commis-
sioner, this court,
held: the appeals must be allowed
the high court erred in law in interfering with the findings
of  the appellate tribunal.  in a reference the  high  court
must  accept the findings of fact reached by  the  appellate
tribunal and it is for the party who applied for a reference
to challenge those findings of fact first by an  application
under s. 66(1).  if the party failed to file an application,
under  s.  66(1) expressly raising the  question  about  the
validity of the findings of fact, he is not entitled to urge
before the high court that the findings are vitiated for any
reason. [938 h-939 b]
india  cements ltd. v. commissioner of  income-tax,  madras,
60, i.t.r. 52, relied on.
935
in  the context of the facts as found by the  tribunal,  the
entire  transactions formed part of a basic  arrangement  or
scheme  between the creditor and the debtor that  the  money
should  be brought into british india after it was taken  by
the borrower outside the taxable territory. [940 b-c]
section  42 requires, in the first place, that money  should
have been lent at interest outside the taxable territory, in
the second place, income, profits or gains should accrue  or
arise  directly  or indirectly from such money  so  lent  at
interest,  and in the third place, that the money should  be
brought into the taxable territories in cash or in kind.  ifthe commissioner of income-tax, ... vs sri meenakshi mills ltd. & ors on 25 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/503166/ 2all  these conditions are fulfilled, then the  section  lays
down  that  the  interest shall be  deemed  to  be  interest
accruing or arising within the taxable territories. [939 d]
the provision in s. 42(1), which brings within the scope  of
the  charging  section  interest earned out  of  money  lent
outside, but brought into british india, was not ultra vires
the  indian  legislature on the ground that  it  was  extra-
territorial in operation. [939 f]
the section contemplates the bringing of money into  british
india with the knowledge of the lender and borrower and this
gives rise to a real territorial connection.  this knowledge
must be an integral part of the transaction. [940 a]
a.   h.  wadia  v.  commissioner of  income-tax,  bombay  17
i.t.r. 63, approved.
in  certain exceptional cases the court is entitled to  lift
the veil of corporate entity and pay regard to the  economic
realities  behind the legal facade.  for example, the  court
has  power to disregard the corporate entity if it  is  used
for tax evasion or to circumvent tax obligation. [941 e]
devid  payne & co. ltd. in re, young v. david payne  &  co.,
ltd. [1904] 2 ch.  d. 608. distinguished.
case law referred to.