on  the  death of two male members of a family  which  owned
extensive  properties  in india and ceylon,  disputes  arose
between their widows and a suit was filed for partition-  of
the  estate.  when each of the two members died, the  estate
duty  authorities  of ceylon levied estate  duty.   the  re-
ceivers  appointed  in the partition suit  paid  the  estate
duties  under  protest  and filed  a  suit  questioning  the
validity  of  the duties.  the suit -was  dismissed  by  the
trial  court but was decreed by the supreme court of  ceylon
on  appeal.  in consequence of the decision of  the  supreme
court  of ceylon, confirmed by the judicial  committee,  the
estate  duty  authorities  had to  refund  the  estate  duty
collected  with interest thereon.  the partition suit  ended
in a compromise and the assessee (the appellant's branch  of
the  family)  took one third share of the estate.   for  the
assessment  year 1958-59, the total income of  the  assesseerm. ar., ar. rm. ar. ramanathan ... vs commissioner of income-tax, ... on 27 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1403810/ 1was  assessed  and it included the amount  received  by  the
assessee  as  its share of the interest paid by  the  estate
duty  authorities of ceylon.  the assessee objected  to  the
inclusion of that amount, but the department, the  appellate
tribunal and the high court on a reference, held against the
assessee.
in appeal to this court,
held  :  (1)  the interest paid to the  assessee  under  the
decree  of  the  supreme court of ceylon on  the  amount  of
estate duty directed to be refunded was income liable to  be
taxed  under  the  indian income-tax act, and  there  is  no
warrant  for treating the amount as a capital receipt  being
in  the nature of damages for wrongful retention  of  money.
the supreme court of ceylon ordered the refund of the estate
duty with legal interest thereon; under s. 192 of the ceylon
ordinance ii of 1889, and the expression "interest" in  that
section should be given its natural meaning. [969 e, f;  970
b]
dr.   shamlal narula v. c.i.t., punjab [1964] 7 s.c.r.  668,
followed.
(2)  the receipt was not of a casual or non-recurring nature
(i)  it  is true that the assessee received the amount as  a
lump-sum payment.  but that does not mean, that the  receipt
is  not  of a recurring nature.  the  interest  was  granted
under  the decree of the court from the date of  institution
of  the  proceedings in the trial court and  was  calculated
upon  the footing that it accrued de die in diem  and  hence
has the essential quality of recurrence which is  sufficient
to bring it within the scope of the act. [971 f-h]
(ii) a receipt of interest which is foreseen and anticipated
cannot be regarded as casual even if it not likely to  recur
again.  when the action was commenced it was well within the
contemplation  and anticipation of the  receivers-plaintiffs
that a successful termination of the action would not merely
result in a decree for the estate duty illegally  collected,
but would also make the defendants liable to pay interest on
that amount. [972 a-b]
966
(3)  it  is of the essence of the jurisdiction of  the  high
court under s. 66  of the act, that in hearing a  reference,
it  can  decide only questions which are referred to  it  or
arise out of the order of the tribunal. [972 h]
c.i.t., bombay v. scindia steam navigation co. ltd. [1962] 1
s.c.r. 788, followed