the  respondent filed a suit against the appellant  claiming
two  sums as losses in respect of two items and interest  on
the  same.   the disputes were referred  to  an  arbitrator,
before whom the respondent did not press for interest  prior
to  the institution of the suit, but pressed its  claim  for
the two sums and interests from the date of the  institution
of  the suit till recovery.  at the time of writing  of  thefirm madanlal roshanlal mahajan vs hukumchand mills ltd., indore on 19 august, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1553220/ 1award,  the arbitrator corrected one of the issues  to  show
that  the  claim  was  for the  price  of  the  items.   the
arbitrator passed a lump sum award in respect of both items,
and awarded interest on that sum from the date of the  award
till  the date of payment.  the award was filed  in  court,,
and  the appellants application for setting aside the  award
was dismissed by the district judge.  this was confirmed  by
the high court.  in appeal, this court,
held  : (i) the arbitrator could give a lump sum award.   he
was not bound to, give a separate award for each claim.   he
award  on  both fact and law is final.  there is  no  appeal
from  his  verdict.  the court cannot review his  award  and
correct any mistake in his adjudication, unless an objection
to the legality of the award is apparent on the face of  it.
[107 g]
champsey  bhara  &  company v.  jivray  ballo  spinning  and
weaving company ltd., l.r. 50 i.a. 324, referred to.
in  the present case the arbitrator gave no reasons for  the
award  there is no legal proposition which is the  basis  of
the award, far less a legal proposition which is  erroneous.
[108 b]
(ii) by amending an issue behind the back of the  appellant,
the  arbitrator  was  not guilty  of  misconduct.   by  this
amendment the appellant suffered no prejudice. [108 c-d]
(iii) in an arbitration in a suit, the arbitrator has  power
to award pendente lite interest.
though, in terms, s. 34 of the code of civil procedure  does
apply  to  arbitrations,  it  was an  implied  term  of  the
reference  in the suit that the arbitrator would decide  the
dispute  according  to law and would give such  relief  with
regard to pendente lite interest as the court could give  if
it  decided the  dispute.  this power of the arbitrator  was
not  fettered either by the arbitration agreement or by  the
arbitration  act,  1940.   in  the  present  case,  all  the
disputes in the suit were referred to the arbitrator and one
of  the disputes in the suit was whether the respondent  was
entitled to pendent lite interest. [109 d]
case law referred to.