the confession of an accused person against a co-accused
is not evidence in the ordinary sense of the term.  it  does
not come within the meaning of evidence contained in sec.  3
of the indian evidence act inasmuch as it is not required to
be  given  on oath, nor in the presence of the  accused  and
cannot be tested by cross-examination.  it is a much  weaker
type  of evidence than the evidence of an approver which  is
not subject to any of these infirmities.
    such a confession can only be used to tend assurance  tokashmira singh vs state of madhya pradesh on 4 march, 1952
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1924452/ 1other  evidence  against  a co-accused. the  proper  way  to
approach  a  case  of this kind is, first,  to  marshal  the
evidence against the accused excluding the confession  alto-
gether  from  consideration and see whether, if  it  is  be-
lieved,  a conviction could safely be based on it. if it  is
capable  of belief independently of the confession, then  it
is  not necessary to call the confession in aid.  but  cases
may  arise  where the judge is not prepared to  act  on  the
other  evidence  as it stands even though, if  believed,  it
would  be  sufficient to sustain a conviction.  in  such  an
event the judge may call in aid the confession and use it to
lend  assurance to the other evidence and thus fortify  him-
self in believing what without the aid of the confession  he
would not be prepared to accept.
bhuboni  sahu  v. the king (76 i.a.  147)  relied  upon.
emperor v. lalit mohan chuckerbutty (38 cal. 559 at 588) and
in re periyaswami moopan (i.l.r. 54 mad. 75) referred to.
    a conviction can be based on the uncorroborated testimo-
ny  of  an  accomplice provided the judge has  the  rule  of
caution, which experience dictates, in mind.
rameshwar v. state of rajasthan [1952] s.c.r. 377  referred
to.
   the rule of caution is that save in exceptional  circum-
stances one accomplice cannot be used to corroborate  anoth-
er,  nor can he be used to corroborate a person  who  though
not an accomplice is no more reliable than one.
  it  is  not  proper or desirable for  the  prosecution  to
examine as a witness the magistrate who recorded the confes-
sion,
527