the  respondents  were put on trial for  offences  under
section  302  read with section 34, ipc. at  the  trial  the
prosecution  mainly  relied  on the  eye-witnesses  and  the
statement  of  the deceased recorded  by  the  investigating
officer, which was sought to be used as a dying declaration.
the defence assailed the credibility of the eye-witnesses as
well  as  the  authenticity of the  dying  declaration.  the
sessions   judge   accepted  the   prosecution   case   that
notwithstanding  the somewhat serious injuries inflicted  on
him,  the  deceased  was  in  a  position  to  instant   the
preparation of the first information report and to make  the
statement before the investigating officer. the  respondents
were convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for life.
    in  the appeal, the high court, on re-assessment of  the
evidence, accepted the defence pleas, allowed the appeal and
ordered acquittal.
    before  this  court it was urged by the state  that  thestate of u.p vs krishna gopal & anr on 12 august, 1988
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10271/ 1high  court  fell  into a serious error  in  its  assumptive
predication  that  injuries on the person on  deceased  were
such  as were likely to render him  unconscious  immediately
and  incapacitate him from making the dying declaration.  it
was  accordingly  urged  that because  the  high  court  had
reversed  the  conviction on conjectures and  not  on  sound
reasoning. this court should interfere.
    on  behalf  of the respondents, it was urged  that  this
court  should  not interfere under article 136 even  if  two
views were possible on the evidence and the one in favour of
the  prosecution could be reached on reappreciation  of  the
evidence as long as the view opted for could not be said  to
be altogether impossible on the evidence.
    allowing the appeal partly and remitting the case to the
high court for disposal on merits afresh, it was,
                                                  pg no 391
                                                  pg no 392
    held:  (1)  it was, no doubt, true that as  a  self-made
rule  of  practice, this court did not  interfere  with  the
findings  of  fact reached by the high court,  but  judicial
pronouncements  themselves  qualify this  rule  and  justify
interference where serious errors of assumption vitiated the
findings. [398a]
    state of u.p. v. jashoda nandan gupta, air 1974 sc  753;
state  of punjab v. sucha singh. air 1974 sc 343;  state  of
a.p.  v. p. anjaneyulu, air 1982 sc 1598; state of  u.p.  v.
pussu, [l983] 3 scr 294; shivaji sahebrao bopade v. state of
maharashtra, [1974] 1 scr 489 referred to.
    (2) the principles laid down regarding the scope of  the
powers  of the appellate court in appeals against  acquittal
did  not detract from the platitude of the courts powers  to
review  and  reappreciate  the  evidence  if  the  order  of
acquittal on review of the evidence was found to be  grossly
erroneous.   these  powers  were  not  different   from   or
inconsistent  with those that the appellate court had in  an
appeal  against conviction; the difference was more  in  the
manner  of approach and the perspective rather than  in  the
content  of  the power. the  expressions  "very  substantial
reasons"  etc. used in several pronouncements which tend  to
qualify  these  powers  did no more  than  to  convey  these
principles. there was thus no immunity to an erroneous order
from  a strict appellate scrutiny. but the  appellate  court
wherever it found justification to reverse an acquittal must
record reasons why it found lower court wrong. [400e-h]
    sheo   swarup's  case,  61  indian  appeals  398;   noor
mohammad's  case air 1945 pc 151; sanwat singh v.  state  of
rajasthan,  air 1961 sc 715; chandra kanta debnath v.  state
of tripura, air 1986 sc 606, referred to.
    (3)  eye  witnesses  account  would  require  a  careful
independent assessment and evaluation for their  credibility
which  should  not be adversely prejudged making  any  other
evidence, including medical-evidence, as the sole touchstone
for the test of such credibility. [403b]state of u.p vs krishna gopal & anr on 12 august, 1988
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10271/ 2    (4)  what degree of probability amounted to `proof'  was
an  exercise  particular  to  each  case.  the  concepts  of
probability,  and the degrees of it, could not obviously  be
expressed in terms of units to be mathematically  enumerated
                                                  pg no 393
as  to  how  many of such  units  constituted  proof  beyond
reasonable  doubt.  there was  an  unmistakable  subjective-
element in the evaluation of the degrees of probability  and
the quantum of proof. forensic probability must, in the last
analysis, rest on a robust common-sense and, ultimately,  on
the trained intuitions of the judge. [403d; 404b-c]
    (5)  doubts would be called reasonable if they were free
from a zest for abstract speculation. a reasonable doubt was
not an imaginary, trivial or a merely possible doubt; but  a
fair doubt based upon reason and common-sense. it must  grow
out of the evidence in the case. [403h; 404a-b]
    6.  the appellant's submission that the  judgment  under
appeal  was rendered infirm on several counts could  not  be
said  to  be without substance. the appeal before  the  high
court must, therefore, receive a reconsideration. [401b]
    qamreeddin v. acqeel, air l982 sc 12 29 adopted.