the central  government had in the year 1949 demarcated
the press area along the bahadur shah zafar marg, new delhi.
it consisted  of plots  nos.. 1 to 10 known as press enclave
as a commercial complex. these plots were alloted to various
newspapers like the indian express, times of india, patriot,express newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 2national herald  etc. petitioner  no.1,  express  newspapers
private ltd.,  engaged  in  the  business  of  printing  and
publishing  a  national  newspaper,  indian  express  (delhi
edition), was alloted plot nos 9-10 bahadur shah zafar marg,
new delhi  by an indenture styled as an "agreement for lease
executed on  may 26,  1954 between  the petitioner  and  the
secretary (local  self-government) to the chief commissioner
of delhi  by the  orders and  directions of the president of
india for the construction of a four storeyed building meant
to be used for a newspaper.
384
     at the  time of  construction of buildings in the press
area there  were no  restrictions as to the floor area ratio
(far) permissible  along the bahadur shah zafar marg and the
only restriction  on construction  of building  in that area
was  that  the  allottees  of  the  plots  should  construct
buildings up  to a height of 60 feet. the express newspapers
pvt. ltd. was allowed to build upon the entire area of plots
nos. 9  and 10 with a ground coverage of 100%, that is, edge
to  edge,  a  structure  with  a  minimum  of  five  storeys
including the  ground floor  for the purpose of installation
of a  printing press  for publication  of a hindi newspaper.
this  permission  was  granted  in  response  to  the  plans
submitted by  the express  newspapers pvt. ltd. and approved
in writing  by the  chief commissioner   of delhi acting for
and on behalf of the lessor, that 18, the union of india.
     during the  preliminary work  of  construction  by  the
express newspapers  pvt. ltd.  an underground sewer line was
found to be running diagonally across plot nos. 9 and 10. it
was agreed  between the  parties vide  lease agreement dated
november 19  1957 that  in view  of  the  underground  drain
running through the plots
 the express buildings would be constructed only to the east
of the drain till the drain was diverted. in effect, an area
of 2740 square yards to the west of the drain had to be left
open as  residual plot  of the  land out  of a total area of
5703  square   yards.  the   express  newspapers  pvt.  ltd.
constructed the  old express  building to  the east  of  the
sewer line  with an  far of 260 with reference to the entire
plot leased  to lt  i.e.. plots  nos. 9  ant 10 although the
building occupied  only half  of the area. on march 17, 1958
another perpetual  lease was executed by assistant secretary
(lsg) to  the chief  commissioner, delhi  by the  order  and
direction of  the president  of india  demising on behalf of
the union  of india  in perpetuity  the nazul land described
therein in  consideration of payment of a premium and yearly
rent. likewise,  the earlier  agreement dated  november  19,
1957 80  also the  supplementary agreement  of may  26, 1954
were also  executed by  the salt officer in the same manner.
both the  agreements stipulated  that the rules, regulations
ant laws  of the  municipal corporation of delhi relating to
buildings which  may be  in force from time to time shall be
confirmed to by the lessee.express newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 3     on  november   6,  1959   all  functions   relating  to
administration of  leases of  government lands in delhi were
transferred from  the chief  commissioner of  delhi (lsg) to
the ministry of works 6 housing.
     in  the   year  1977,   petitioner  no.l,  the  express
newspapers pvt.  ltd., approached  the municipal corporation
of delhi for
385
shifting the  sewer line outside plots 08. 9 and 10 and also
moved the  lessor, the union of india, ministry of works and
housing for grant of requisite sanction to construct the new
express   building with  an far  of 40.  the chief engineer,
delhi water  supply ant  sewage disposal undertaking granted
approval to  the diversion  of the sewer line at the cost of
petitioner no-l.  thereafter, petitioner  no.1, informed the
ministry of  works and  housing about the aforesaid approval
granted  by   the  municipal  l  corporation  of  delhi  and
requested the ministry for advice on the far permissible for
the said  building. the matter was processed in the ministry
of works  and housing  at  various  leveling  ultimately  on
october 21,  1978, the  vice-chairman  ,  delhi  development
authority took  the following  decision   (a) to  amalgamate
plots nos.9  and 10.and  taking into  account  the  existing
built-up area  would permit  the far  of 360 overall; (b) to
allow the  residual area  of plots nos.9 and 10 to be  built
in line  with the times of  india and shama building; (c) to
exclude  the  basement  from  the  calculation  of  the  far
provided the  basements are  for office purposes; (d) to per
lt permit  on the  service road in the same manner as it was
for the  other building  in  this  line.  the  vice-chairman
further directed that the aforesaid  order was to be treated
as one under special appeal. he accordingly gave instruction
for  issuing   'no  objection'   to  petitioner   no-l   for
construction on  the residual  area and to make a reference-
to the  government of  india asking  for confirmation of the
action proposed  in view  of the  order of  the minister for
works and  housing to  clear the  cases immediately  and  to
obtain his  ex post  facto sanction. on november 4, 1978 the
joint  director   (buildings)  delhi  development  authority
issued a  "no objection  certificate to  the petitioners and
the ministry  of works  ant housing granted it ex post facto
approval on  november 24,  1978. thereafter, petitioner knob
constructed its new express building.
     on february  17, 1980, respondent no.2 jagmohan assumed
office at the lt. governor of delhi and on the same evening,
he summoned the commissioner of the municipal corporation of
delhi and  called for the files relating to the construction
of the  new express building at bahadur shah zafar marg, new
delhi. on  the next  day,  the  necessary  files  were  made
available. on february 20, 1980, some important files of the
delhi  development   authority  relating   to  the   express
buildings were  sent to  respondent no.2.  on  february  29,
1980, respondent  no.2 through  the  commissioner  municipalexpress newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 4corporation of  delhi caused  the locks  of the  office  and
cupboards of the zonal engineer (building) to be broken open
to
386
take away  the file relating to the new express building. on
march 1, 1980 respondent no.2 convened a press conference in
which he  handed over  a press release alleging (1) that the
new express  building  put  up  by  the  petitioner  fas  in
contravention of  law in  several respects; (11) that he had
ordered an inquiry to be made by a committee of three of his
subordinate  officials   and  (111)  that  the  new  express
building might  have to  be demolished.  on  the  same  day,
although the  relevant  files  had  been  removed  from  his
office, the zonal engineer (buildings), city zone, municipal
corporation of delhi served a notice  on petitioner no.1, to
show cause  why action should not be taken for demolition of
the express  buildings under  88. 343  and 344  of the delhi
municipal corporation  act, 1957. on march 4, 1980, a second
press release  was issued from the raj nivas, to justify the
action of  respondent no.2  in initiating  the inquiry.  the
issue of  show cause  notice again  figured in a third press
release dated  march 8,  1980. the  ministry  of  works  and
housing  also   submitted  the   files   relating   to   the
construction of  the new express building to respondent no.2
on march  7, 1980.  on march 1, 1980 the engineer officer in
the land  and development office under the ministry of works
and housing also issued a  notice to the petitioners to show
cause within  30 days  as to  why the property should not be
re-entered under  clause 5  of the  perpetual lease  on  the
grounds: (1)  that  the  construction  of  the  new  express
building was  without permission  from the  lessor under the
terms of  lease; (ii)  that the plans were not submitted for
the sanction  under the  terms of  lease by  the lessor; and
(iii) that  the plans  were in  contravention of cl.2(5) and
2(14) of  the lease  deed. on  march 12, 1980 at a specially
convened press  conference,  respondent  no.2  released  the
report  of   the  committee   of  his   subordinates   which
substantiated the  view of  respondent no.2  and also  found
that petitioner  no.1 was  liable to  pay  rs.  35  lacs  as
conversion charges.
     the  petitioners   challenged  the   validity  of   the
aforesaid two  notices before the supreme court under art.32
of the constitution on the grounds: (i) that the lt.governor
appointed  by   the  president  under  art.  239(1)  of  the
constitution 18  an administrator  and  he  discharges  such
functions as  are entrusted to him by the president of india
and in  the absence of a notification under art. 239(1), the
lt. governor  cannot usurp  the functions  of the  union  of
india in  relation to the properties of the union: (11) that
the lieutenant-governor  1 not  a  successor  of  the  chief
commissioner of  delhi. there was notification issued by the
president under art. 239(1) of the constitution for
387express newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 5the conferral of any power on the lt. governor to administer
the   lease in question; (ill) that lt is inconceivable that
after october  1, 1959  when the administrative control over
the land  development officer was transferred from the delhi
administration to  the ministry  of  works  housing  and  by
virtue of  a  notification  issued  under  art.  299(1)   the
secretary, ministry  of works housing was made the competent
authority tc  act for  the  president  with  regard  to  any
contract, grant  or as  assurance or  property of the union,
the lt.governor  could still  arrogate to himself the powers
of the union of india, ministry of works housing in relation
to the  lease;  (lv)  that  respondent  no.2,  jagmohan,  is
actuated with personal bias against the indian express which
had published an article in the indian express in april 1977
with regard  to his  role during  the period of emergency in
turkman gate demolitions. the proposed action of re-entry by
the lessor  i.e. the  union of  india ministry  of  works  &
housing at  the instance of the lt. governor of delhi is  an
act of  political vendetta.  the impugned  notices have been
issued with  an evil  eye and  an unequal  hand and  with  a
deliberate design  to compel  the petitioners  to close down
the express  group of  newspapers in  general and the indian
express in  particular. the said notice are ex-facie illegal
and without  prediction and  are contrary to facts and legal
provision .  the arbitrary  and discriminatory initiation of
executive action  under the  guise of  alleged infraction of
the terms  of the lease auditor the master plan of delhi and
or the  municipal  building  bye-law  is  violative  of  the
petitioners' fundamental  rights under arts.14,19(1) (a) and
19(1)(g) of  the constitution;  (v) that the impugned notice
issued by the zonal engineer (building) city zone, municipal
corporation of delhi dated march 1,1980 was illegal and void
as he did not apply his mind at all to the question at issue
but merely  issued the  same at  the instance  of respondent
no.2. the  construction of the said building was not without
or contrary  to the  sanction referred  to in  s.336  or  in
contravention of  any of  the provisions  of the act or bye-
laws mate  thereunder; (vi)  that the erection of the double
basement or  a working platform in a printing press like the
express newspapers  pvt. ltd.  is a  compoundable  deviation
from the sanctioned plan and the insistence of the municipal
corporation of  delhi to  demolish the same suffers from the
vice of  hostile discrimination. (vii) that the construction
of the new  express building its an increased far of 360 was
in conformity  with clause 2(5) of the perpetual lease dated
march 17,1958  inasmuch as  it was with the express sanction
of the  lessor i.e.  the union  of india.  in terms  of  the
government of  india (allocation  of business  rule, 1961 as
well
388
as  under   a  notification  issued  under  art.299(1),  the
ministry of  works &  housing with  the minister at the head
was and  is the  ultimate authority responsible to deal withexpress newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 6the property  of the union and to enter into all contractual
obligations relating thereto. the minister had not only full
authority, power and jurisdiction to grant permission to the
petitioners to construct
 the  new express building with an increased far of 360 with
a double  basement for  the  installation  of  the  printing
press, but  the action  taken by  the then government was in
good  faith   after  taking   into  consideration   all  the
circumstances attendant  at all  levels. (viii)  that  there
could be no objection to the construction of the new express
building with  an increased  far of  360 as  it allowed  the
residual area  of plots  nos. 9  and 10  to be built in line
with other  building along  the  bahadur  shah  zafar  marg.
further, the  master plan for delhi subsequently approved by
the central government in the year 1962 does not mention the
pre area  on the  bahadur shah  zafar are  comprising of the
press enclave.  although specified  as a commercial area, it
is not   listed  in the  list of already built-up commercial
areas because it is relates to the walled city of old delhi.
the zonal  development plan  for d-ii  area within which the
pre- plots  are located also permitted an far of 400 for the
press area  in the  bahadur shah zafar marg. therefore , all
that the  then minister  for works  & housing   did  was  to
restore to  the petitioners  the right  that  they  acquired
under the  perpetual lease  dated march  17, 1958 i.e. to be
treated alike  alongwith other plot-holders in that area and
a denial  of such  equal  terms  would  be  opposed  to  the
principles of  equality besides being violative of art.14 of
the constitution.  (ix) that  the express  building at  9-10
bahadur shah  zafar  marg  forms  the  nerve-centre  of  the
express group  of  newspapers  as  the  editorials  and  the
leading articles  of the  indian press  are sent out and the
editorial policy  laid down from delhi office to ten centres
all over  india. in  this factual  background, the  impugned
notices have a direct impact on the freedom of the press and
being in  excess of  governmental authority  and  colourable
exercise of  statutory powers,  are liable to be struck down
is     offending  art.l9(1)(a)   red  with   art.14  of  the
constitution. (x) that the lessor i.e. the union of india is
estoppel by  the doctrine  of promissory estoppel and cannot
therefore go  back upon  all assurances  given  and  actions
taken by  the previous  government,  particularly  when  the
petitioners had  acted upon the decisions so reached and had
constructed the  new  express    building  with  a  cost  of
approximately rs.  1.30 crores  by february  1980  which  at
present would cost more than rs 3 crores.
389
     it was  contended on  behalf of  respondent  no.1,  the
union of india; (1) that the right to occupy the land leased
for the  construction of  a building  for installation  of a
printing press  is not  within art. 19(1)(a) nor within art.
19(1)(g) but  such a  right  is  derived  from  a  grant  or
contract; (2) that the right arising out of a statute or outexpress newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 7of a  contract cannot  be a fundamental right itself. once a
contract is  entered into or a grant is mate, the rights and
obligations of the parties are not government by part iii of
the constitution  but by  the term of the document embodying
the contract  or the  grant, and  any  complaint  about  its
breach cannot  be a matter for grant of a writ, direction or
order under  art. 226  of the  constitution, such  less and.
art.32, ant  since the  petitioners are seeking to enforce a
contractual right,  lt cannot be decided on a petition under
art. 32  of the  constitution. (3)  that the content of art.
19(1)(g) of  the constitution  would not  include the  right
which 1  guarantee by  other clauses of art.19 (4). that the
argument of the petitioners that the building in question is
necessary  for  running  the  press  and  any  statutory  or
executive action  to pull it down or forfeit the lease would
directly impinge  on the  right of  freedom  of  speech  ant
expression  under   art.  19(1)(g)  18  wholly  misconceived
inasmuch  as  every  activity  that  may  be  necessary  for
exercise of  freedom of  speech and  expression or  that may
facilitate such exercise or make lt meaningful ant effective
cannot be elevated to the status of a fundamental right. (5)
that the  right to  the land  and  the  right  to  construct
buildings thereon  for running  a  printing  press  are  not
derived from art. 19(1) (a) but spring from the terms of the
grant of  such lands  by the government under the provisions
of the  government grants  act, 1895  and regulated by other
laws governing  the subject  viz. the delhi development act,
1957 the  master plan  ant the zonal development plan framed
thereunder, the  delhi municipal  corporation act,  1957 and
the delhi  municipal corporation  (building) bye-laws,  1959
which  regulate  construction  of  buildings  in  the  union
territory of delhi irrespective of the purpose for which the
building 18  constructed. (6)  that the right to run a press
may be  a fundamental right guaranteed under . art. 19(1)(a)
or art.  19(1)(g)  but the right to use a particular building
for running  a press is altogether another thing inasmuch as
no particular building is equally fit for the running of the
press and  the person  desiring to  run a  press or  already
running the  press is at liberty to acquire another suitable
building for that purpose. further, even if the buildings in
question were  necessary for  the enjoyment  of  the  rights
under art-19(1)(a)  or art.  19(1)(r)  'a  right  to  use  a
particular building does not
390
become an  integral part  of the  right to freedom of speech
and expression'  or the  'right to  carry on  any  trade  of
business in printing and publishing a newspaper' and clearly
therefore the  petitions under art. 32 are not maintainable.
(7) that  even on  a question  of fact, the direct impact of
the impugned  notices will  not be  on the  double  basement
wherein printing press is installed but will be wholly or in
part on  the two  upper storeys which are not intended to be
used in  relation to  the press  or for  publication of  theexpress newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 8intended hindi newspaper but only for the purpose of letting
out the  same for profit; the only other possible effect any
be the  removal of  the upper basement which the petitioners
call a  working  platform  which  has  been  constructed  in
violation of the building regulations. (8) that there was no
imminent danger  of demolition  of the  express building nor
was the  impugned notice  dated march 10, 1980 issued by the
engineer officer, land & development office, a notice of re-
entry upon forfeiture of lease. it was merely a notice of an
exploratory nature  requiring the  petitioners to show cause
why the  lease should  not be  forfeited under  cl.5 of  the
lease-deed for  alleged breaches  of cls.-  2(5)  and  2(14)
thereof.  the  petitioners  should  have  therefore  entered
appearance before  the land & development officer and showed
cause against the action proposed. it was only if the land &
development   officer   was   not   satisfied   with   their
explanation, that  he would put up the papers before the lt.
governor for  necessary action.  it would  then be  for  the
lessor i.e.  the union of india, ministry of works & housing
to decide whether or not the lease should be forfeited under
cl.5 of  the lease-deed. (9) that the impugned notice by the
engineer officer  purporting to  act on behalf of the lessor
i.e. the union of india, ministry of works & housing was not
based either  on the  report of  the three-member  committee
obtained  by   the  lt.governor  or  on  the  basis  of  any
communication from  him, (10)  that the  lt.governor had  no
powers in  relation to  the properties  of  the  union  and,
therefore, the  union of  india 1  not bound by the acts of
the lt.  governor. the lt. governor had no power in relation
to the  lease and,  therefore, he could not usurp to himself
the powers  and functions  of the union of india in relation
to  the   lease  deed.   however  the   lt.governor  as  the
administrator had  to keep  himself informed  and cannot  be
said to  have acted malafide merely because of any possible
personal malus  animus on  his part,  if the  quality of the
action was itself in complete accord with the law. (11) that
the government  itself was in possession of relevant records
and applied  its mind to them and the impugned notice issued
by the  engineer officer  who was empowered to act on behalf
of the president under act.299(1) of the constitution
391
having  been   authenticated  in   the  manner  required  by
art.77(3), it   must  be deemed  to be  the decision  of the
president on  the advice  of the  council  of  ministers  as
enjoined by  art.74(2) and  the  court  was  precluded  from
making any  investigation into  the  circumstances  thereto.
(12) that  it was the respondent no.2 to meet the charges of
malafides levelled against him.
     on behalf of respondent no.2, the lt.governor of delhi,
it was  argued: (1)  that the administrator appointed by the
president  under  art.239(1),  as  amended  by  the  seventh
amendment, could  be called  by any  designation,  that  the
chief  commissioner   of   delhi   continued   to   be   theexpress newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 9administrator  of   the  union   territory  of  delhi  under
art.239(1) after  november 1,  1956 when  the government  of
part states  act, 1951  was replaced  by 8.130 of the states
reorganisation act, 1956 and that he functioned as such till
september 6,  1966 since  the delhi administration act, 1966
continued to use the nomenclature of administrator appointed
by the president under art.239(1). it was for the first time
on september  7, 966  that the  administrator of  the  union
territory of  delhi who  used to  be designated as the chief
commissioner was  re-designated as the lt.governor. (2) that
the lt.governor was successor of the chief commissioner and,
therefore,  all   the  powers   exercisable  by   the  chief
commissioner in  relation to  the lease  vested in  him. (3)
that the  lt. governor was the alter ego of the president in
relation to  such territory  which  he  is  called  upon  to
administer on  behalf of  the president.  one of the primary
functions of  the lt. governor, as the administrator, was to
be aware  of facts  brought to  his knowledge  and therefore
respondent no.2  could not  have turned  a blind  eye to the
action of  sikander  bakht,  the  then  minister  for  works
housing in  making a highly fraudulent, illegal and improper
grant of sanction to petitioner no.1, the express newspapers
pvt.  ltd.  to  build  the  new  express  building  with  an
increased far  of 360.  (4) that  the lt.  governor  as  the
appointed agent  or nominee of the president was entitled to
act on  behalf of  the  lessor  i.e.  the  union  of  india,
ministry of  works &  housing in  relation to  the lease and
therefore, he  was well within his rights (a) in calling for
and making perusal of the respective files from the ministry
of works  & housing  delhi  development  authority  and  the
municipal   corporation   of   delhi   pertaining   to   the
construction of  the express  building with an increased far
of 360;  (b) in  constituting a  three-member committee  to
inquire into the circumstances
392
relating to  the grant  of sanction  by the then minister of
work &  housing and  to take  necessary steps as regards the
unauthorised construction  of the  new express building; and
(c) in  forwarding the  report of the three-member committee
to the concerned authority, meaning the minister for works &
housing for taking necessary steps. (5) that the transfer of
administrative control  of the  l &  o on october 1, 1958 to
the ministry  of works  & housing  did not  divest the chief
commissioner of his contractual powers given under the lease
and he  alone represented the lessor i.e. the union of india
and not  the ministry  of works & housing (6) that being the
lt.  governor   of  delhi,   he  was   responsible  for  the
administration of the union territory of delhi and, as such,
he was acting within his power to direct all the authorities
concerned to  prevent violation  of laws  by any  person  or
institution.  he  further  asserted  that  he,  as  the  lt.
governor of  delhi,  was  fully  competent  to  appoint  the
inquiry committee  under the  commissioner of  inquiry act,express newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 101952. (7)  that the  union of  india or  the lt. governor of
delhi  never   intended  to   inflict  a   reprisal  on  the
petitioners for the independent stand of the newspapers they
publish. (8)  that the respondents had no personal animosity
towards the  express group  of newspapers  and the  criminal
complaint for  defamation was  instituted by respondent no.2
because the  indian express  was guilty  of fabricating  and
publishing  false,   motivated,  scandalous   stories  about
respondent no.2  and others. (9) that he had not ordered the
issuance of  the notice  in question  and that  the  land  &
development officer  was an  authority  independent  of  the
administrative control  and supervision of the lt. governor.
as regards  the impugned  show cause  notice issued  by  the
zonal- engineer  (building) city zone, municipal corporation
of delhi,  lt was  asserted that the same had been issued by
the municipal  corporation  of  delhi  in  exercise  of  its
statutory  powers  under  88.  343  and  344  of  the  delhi
municipal  corporation   act  after   verification  of   the
allegations. (10)  that the perpetual lease-deed dated march
18, 1958  governs the  relationship effectively  between the
union of india and the lt. governor  on the one hand and the
petitioners on  the other  i.e... the  contractual relations
between the  parties. (11)  that the sewer, according to the
terms of  the lease-deed,  could not be diverted without the
consent of  the chief  commissioner and  the approval of the
ministry of  works &  housing was  a nullity  being  without
jurisdiction  and   legal  competence.  (12)  that  for  the
commercial user  of the  residual area to be kept as 'green'
it is  only the  chief commissioner (lt. governor) who could
give
393
sanction  to  construct  for  the  commercial  user  at  the
residual area; the petitioners were liable to pay commercial
realization changes;  and (13)  that lt  is  for  the  chief
commissioner (lt.  governor) to  decide if the breaches were
remediable or  as to the nature of the remedies required for
the breach.  since the breaches are not remediable breaches,
the impugned  notice dated  march 10,  1980  issued  by  the
engineer officer,  l &  o for  re-entry  upon  the  land  on
forfeiture of  the lease  for breach  of the  conditions was
valid and proper.
       counsel for respondent no.4, municipal corporation of
delhi, urged  (1) that the express newspapers pvt. ltd. have
no right  to construct  the upper basement particularly when
the corporation  refused to  accord sanction to it and that,
in any event, it was not such an unavoidable necessity as to
break the law; and (2) that even if some receiving floor may
perhaps be  necessary to receive the printed newspapers from
the machine,  it would  be achieved by locating the machines
on a  suitable pedestal  or  by  laying  the  floor  of  the
basement in  such a  manner as to discharge the newspaper on
the ground floor; and (3) that under the master plan and the
building bye-laws, not more than one basement is permissibleexpress newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 11and that any basement more than one will have to be reckoned
for the purpose of far.
     counsel for  respondent no.5 land & development officer
contended (1)  that under  the terms  of the  lease deed  of
1958, previous  consent of  either the president of india or
the chief  commissioner (lt.  governor) or  such officer  or
body as  the  lessor  (president  of  india)  or  the  chief
commissioner of  delhi authorised was necessary for building
activity on the residual area of the plots (2740 sq. yards).
the ministry of works & housing did not represent the lessor
or  the   chief  commissioner   and  (2)  that  the  land  6
development officer  is not a functionary under the ministry
of works & housing. he is the officer appointed on behalf of
the  lessor  to  administer  the  lease.  at  no  stage  the
petitioners approached  the office of land & development for
permission  to  construct  on  the  residual  area  of  2740
sq.yards to  the west  of the  pipe-line and no approval was
obtained from  the office  of l  & o  for construction  of a
building in  contravention of  clauses 2(5), (9) and (14) of
the lease.  the so-called permissions and approvals obtained
by the  petitioner- have  no legal  competence or  authority
under the terms of the lease-deed
394
which governed  the relationship between the petitioners and
respondent no.1.
     allowing the writ petitions,
^
     held : by the court (per a.p. sen, e.s. vankataramiah &
r.b. misra, j.)
     (1) the writ petitions under art.32 of the constitution
must succeed  and are  allowed with costs. the notice issued
by the  engineer officer,  land &  development office  dated
march 10, 1980 purporting to act on behalf of the government
of india,  ministry of works & housing requiring the express
newspapers pvt.  ltd. to  show cause why the lessor i.e. the
union of  india, ministry  of works & housing should not re-
enter upon  and take  possession of  plots nos.  9  and  10,
bahadurshah zafar  marg, new delhi together with the express
buildings built  thereon, under  cl.5 of  the  indenture  of
lease dated  mar h 17, 1958 for alleged breaches of cls.2(5)
and 2(14)  thereof, and  the earlier  notice dated  march 1,
1980 issued  by the  zonal engineer  (building), city  zone,
municipal corporation,  delhi requiring  them to  show cause
why the  aforesaid buildings  should not be demolished under
88.343 and 344 of the delhi municipal corporation act, 1957,
are quashed. it is declared that the construction of the new
express building  on the  residual portion  of  2740  square
yards on  the  western  side  of  plots  no  8.  9  and  10,
bahadurshah zafar  marg with  an increased far of 360 with a
double basement  for installation  of a  printing press  for
publication  of   a  hindi  daily  newspaper  was  with  toe
permission of  the lessor  i.e.. the union of india ministry
of works  & housing  and did  not  constitute  a  breach  ofexpress newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 12clauses 2(5) and 2(14) of the lease-deed. 554 e-; 555 al
     (2) the  lt. governor  failed to  make a distinction in
this case  between the  power with  respect to  the  subject
'property of  the union  and the revenue therefrom' which is
in entry  32 of  list i  of  the  seventh  schedule  to  the
constitution  and   the  general  powers  of  administration
entrusted to  him under  article 239  of the constitution as
the administrator  of the  union  territory  of  delhi.  the
property in  question 18 a part of the estate of the central
government. mere nearness to the seat of the central
395
government does  not clothe  the lt.  governor of delhi with
any   power in  respect  of  the  property  of  the  central
government. he  can discharge  only those  powers which  are
entrusted to  him by  the constitution  ant the  laws. it is
also not  correct to claim that all the powers of the former
chief commissioner of delhi have devolved on the lt.governor
and continue to vest in him. [556 b-d]
     per a.p.sen, j.
     1(i) freedom  of the  press is  comprehended within the
right to  freedom of  speech and expression guaranteed under
art.19(1)(a). the freedom of thought and expression, and the
freedom of  the press  are not  only  valuable  freedoms  in
themselves but  are basic to a democratic from of government
which proceeds on the theory that problems of the government
can be  solved by the free exchange of thought and by public
discussion of  the various  issues facing  the nation. it is
necessary to  emphasize and  one must  not forget  that  the
vital  importance   of  freedom  of  speech  and  expression
involves the  freedom to  dissent to  a free  democracy like
ours. democracy  relies on  the freedom  of the press. it is
the inalienable right of everyone to comment freely upon any
matter of public importance. this right is on of the pillars
of individual liberty-freedom of speech, which supreme court
has  always  unfailingly  guarded.  howsoever  precious  and
cherished the  freedom of speech is under art.19(1)(a), this
freedom is not absolute and unlimited at all times and under
all  circumstances   but  is  subject  to  the  restrictions
contained in art.19(2). that must be 80 because unrestricted
freedom of  the press  and is  wholly free  from restraints,
amounts to uncontrolled licence which would lead to disorder
and anarchy  and lt  would be  hazardous to ignore the vital
importance of  our social   and  national interest in public
order and security of the state. 474 c-d; 475 d-g
     1(ii) the  extent of  permissible limitations  on  this
freedom are  indicated by  the fundamental  law of  the land
itself viz.  art.19(2) of the constitution. but, permissible
restrictions on  any fundamental right guaranteed under part
iii of the constitution have to be imposed by a duly enacted
law and  must not  be excessive i.e. they must not go beyond
what is  necessary to  achieve the  object of  the law under
which they  are sought  to be  imposed. the power to imposed
restrictions on fundamentalexpress newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 13396
right is  essentially a  power to 'regulate' the exercise of
these rights.  in fact,  'regulation' and  not extinction of
that which  18 to  be regulated  18, generally speaking, the
extent to which permissible restrictions any go lpn order to
satisfy the test of
 reasonableness.  the t. t laid down by the supreme court 18
whether the  direct and  immediate impact  of  the  impugned
action 18 on the freedom of speech and expression guaranteed
under art.l9(1)(a) which includes the freedom of the press.
     in  the  instant  case,  the  very  threat  18  to  the
existence of  a free  and independent  press.  the  impugned
notices of  re-entry upon  forfeiture of  lease ant  of  the
threatened demolition  of the express buildings are intended
and meant  to silence  the voice  of the  indian express. it
must logically follow that the impugned notices constitute a
direct ant  immediate threat to the freedom of the press ant
are thus  violative of  art.l9(1)(a) read with art.14 of the
constitution.  it   must  accordingly  be  held  that  these
petitions under art.32 of the constitution are maintainable.
[475 h; 476 a-c; 477 d-e]
     benett coleman co.  ors. v. union of india  ors. [1973]
2 s.c.r. 757 followed.
romesh thappar  v. state  of madras  [1950] s.c.r. 594,
sakal papers  (p) ltd.  & anr.  v. union  of india  [1962] 3
s.c.r. 842  and express  newspapers (p) ltd. & anr. v. union
of india & ors. [1959] s.c.r. 12 at 120 relied upon.
     the correctness  of the  landmark  decision  in  meneka
gandhi's case  and the  innovative  constriction  placed  on
art.14 in  the three  cases  of  royal,  maneka  gandhi  and
international airport  authority (supra), which have evolved
new dimensions  in judicial  process, is  no longer  open to
question. [472 c-d]
     meneka gandhi  v. union  of india  [1978] 2 s.c.r. 621,
e.p. boyappa  v. state  of tamil nadu & anr. [1974] 2 s.c.r.
348 meneka  gandhi v.  union of  india   (supra)  and  ramana
dayaram shetty  v. international  import authority  of india
ltd. & ors. [1979] 3 s.c.r. 1014 affirmed.
all  india  bank  employees'  associating  v.  national
industrial tribunal & ors. [1962] 3 s.c.r. 269 referred to.
397
     (3) even  in cases involving purely contractual issues,
the   settled law  18 that  where  statutory  provisions  of
public law are involved, writs will issue. [484 a]
     (4) (1)  section 2  of the  government grants act, 1895
excludes the operation of the transfer of property act, 1892
to government grants. section 3 declare that all provisions,
any such  grant or  transfer as  aforesaid shall be valid nt
shall take  effect according to their tenor, notwithstanding
any rule  of law, statute or enactment of the legislature to
the contrary. a series of judicial decisions pave determined
the overriding  effect of  s.3 making  lt amply clear that a
grant of  property by  the government partakes of the natureexpress newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 14of law  since lt  overrides even  legal provisions which are
contrary to the tenor of the document. [478 d-e]
     (4)(ii) there  can be  no  doubt  whatever  on  a  true
construction of  the impugned  notice dated  march 10,  1980
that  the   engineer  officer,  land  &  development  office
purporting to act on behalf of the lessor i.e.. the union of
india, ministry of works housing served a notice of re-entry
upon forfeiture of lease under cl.5 of the lease-deed. there
was no  question of the said motley being construed to be of
an exploratory  nature. since  respondent no.2  is  not  the
successor of  the chief  commissioner of  delhi nor  has any
function in  relation to  the lease, there is no warrant for
the suggestion  that prior approval of the lt. governor is a
condition precedent  to the  right of  the lessor  i.e.  the
union of  india to  exercise  its  right  of  re-entry  upon
forfeiture of lease under cl.5 of the lease-deed. [480 b-d]
     4.(iii) the  express newspapers  pvt. ltd. having acted
upon the grant of permission by the lessor i.e. the union of
india, ministry  of works  & housing  to construct  the  new
express building  with an increased far of 360 together with
a double  basement was  clearly not an unauthorized occupant
within the  meaning  of  s.2(g)  of  the  act.  the  express
buildings constricted  by express- newspapers pvt. ltd. with
the sanction of the lessor i.e. the union of india, ministry
of works  & housing on plots no-. 9 ant 10 bahadurshah zafar
marg demised  on perpetual  lease by  registered  lease-deed
dated march  17, 1958  can, by  no process  of reasoning, be
regarded  as   public  premises  belonging  to  the  central
government  ouster  s.2(g).  that  being  so,  there  is  no
question of the lessor applying for eviction of the express-
newspapers pvt.
398
ltd. under  6.5(1)  of  the  public  premises  (eviction  of
unauthorized occupants) act, 1971 nor has the estate officer
any authority or jurisdiction to direct their eviction under
sub-s.(2) thereof  by summary process. due process of law in
a case  like the  present necessarily  implies the filing of
suit by  the lessor  i.e. the  union of  india, ministry  of
works &  housing for the enforcement of the alleged right of
re-entry if  any, upon  forfeiture of lease due to breach of
the terms  of the  lease. however,  the government  has  the
power to  take recourse  to the  provisions  of  the  public
premises (eviction  of  unauthorized  occupants)  act,  1971
where admittedly  there is  unauthorized construction  by  a
lessee or  by any  other person  on government land which is
public premises within the meaning of s.2(e) and such person
is in unauthorized occupation thereof. [484 e-f; 485 a-d]
     bishan das  & ors.  v. state  of punjab & ors. [1962] 2
s.c.r. 69 affirmed.
wazir chaud  v. state of h.p. [1955] 1 s.c.r. 408 & ram
prasad narayan  sahi v.  state of  bihar [1953]  s.c.r. 1129
relied upon.
state of orissa v. ram chandra dev a.i.r. 1964 s.c. 685express newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 15criticised.
     5(i) under  the constitution  of india,  delhi became a
part 'c'  state w.e.f.  january 26, 1960 and it was provided
by art.  239(1)  that  a state  specified in  part 'c' of the
first schedule shall be administered by the president acting
to such extent as he thinks fit through a chief commissioner
or lt. governor to be appointed by him. [491 e-f]
art. 239(1)  of  the  constitution  differed  from  the
provision contained  in s.94(3)  of the  government of india
act. 1935  to the  extent that  the appointment  of a  chief
commissioner   or   lt.   governor   as   an   administrator
irrespective of  the designation  and entrustment of powers,
functions and duties to him by the president, were not to be
in his  discretion but  had to be exercised on the advice of
the council  of ministers.  except for  this, 8.94(3) of the
government  of   india  act,  1935  and  art.239(1)  of  the
constitution as  enacted were  identical in  respect of  the
provisions for the administration of delhi as a chief
399
commissioner's province under the 1935 act and as a part 'c'
state under  the constitution, by the governor-general under
28.94(3) and  under art.  239(1) by  the president acting to
such  extent   as  he   thought  fit,   `through  the  chief
commissioner  or   the  lt.  governor  as  an  administrator
irrespective of the designation 491 h; 492 a-b]
     5(ii) art.  239(1)  of  the constitution  was amended by
the constitution  (7th amendment)  act, 1956 w.e.f. november
1, 1956 and for the words 'through a chief commissioner or a
lt. governor  to be  appointed  by  him'  in  art.239(1)  as
originally enacted,  the words  substituted are 'through a-n
administrator appointed  by him  with such designation as he
may specify'.  therefore, the administrator appointed by the
president under  art. 239(1) whether with the designation of
the chief commissioner or of the lt. governor could exercise
only such  powers, functions and duties as were entrusted to
him  by  the  president  i.e.  there  have  to  be  specific
entrustment of  powers by  the president  under  art.239(1).
from november  l, 1956  part 'c'  states ceased  to exist by
virtue of  the seventh  amendment and  in their  place union
territories were  substituted in  the first  schedule to the
constitution, including  the union  territory of  delhi i.e.
the territories which immediately before the commencement of
the constitution  were comprised in the chief commissioner's
province of delhi. [493 a-b; d-e; 493 f-g]
     5(iii) on  october 1,  1959 decision  was taken  by the
government of  india to transfer. the administrative control
of the  office of land & development officer, new delhi from
the delhi  administration to  ministry of  works, housing  &
supply w.e.f.  october  l,  1959.  this  decision  was  duly
communicated to  the chief  commissioner of delhi and to the
land &  development officer,  new delhi.  the  president  of
india on  february 1,  1966 issued an order under art.299(1)
of the  constitution which  inter alia  directed that in theexpress newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 16case of  land l  development office  (1) all  contracts  and
assurances of property relating to batter falling within the
jurisdiction  of   land  l   development  officer,  (2)  all
contracts, deeds  and other  instruments relating to ant for
the purpose  of enforcement  of the  terms and conditions of
the sale/lease-deed  of the government property in delhi/new
delhi, etc.  made in  exercise of the executive power of the
union  may   be  executed  on  his  behalf  by  the  land  &
development officer. therefore, neither the chief
400
commissioner nor  the lt.  governor hat  anything to do with
the   office of the land & development or the administration
of nazul lands in the union territory of delhi after october
1, 1959.  they have  not been conferred any authority by the
president under art. 299(1) to enter into any contracts mate
in the  exercise of  the executive  power of the union or to
act 'on  behalf  of'  the  president  in  relation  to  such
contract or  assurance of  property i.e. to act on behalf of
the  president   for  the   enforcement  of  the  terms  ant
conditions thereof. there is also no notification under art.
239(1) by  the president  vesting chief  commissioner or the
lt. governor  with any power, functions and duty in relation
to the  property of  the union territory of delhi. [495 c-d;
f-g; e; 497 a-b]
     5(iv) it  would therefore, appear that the territory of
delhi as  a part  'c' state  under the first schedule to the
constitution was  a  separate  and  distinct  constitutional
entity as  from that  of a chief commissioner province under
the government  of india act, 1935, and this is equally true
of the  union territory  of delhi.  it must logically follow
that with  the transformation of the territory of delhi from
a  chief   commissioner's  province  under  s.94(3)  of  the
government of  india act, 1935 into that of a part 'c' state
under the  constitution and after the seventh amendment into
the  union   territory  delhi,   the  office  of  the  chief
commissioner  of   delhi  disappeared   and   that   of   an
administrator appointed  by the  president under  art.239(1)
with  such   designation  as   he  may  specify,  came  into
existence.   the   necessary   concomitant   is   that   the
administrator of  the union  territory of delhi derived only
such powers,  functions ant  duties as were entrusted to him
by the president under art.239(1). [501 c-e]
     5-(v) there  was no  order in  council  issued  by  the
governor general  under 8.94(3)  of the  government of india
act, 1935  nor any  order issued by the president under art.
239(1) of  the constitution investing the chief commissioner
of delhi to deal with the property of the union. the matters
relating to  the property of the union of india are included
in the  seductive power  of the  union under  art.53 of  the
constitution read with art.298 which expressly provides that
the seductive  power  of  the  union  shall  extent  to  the
acquisition, holding ant disposal of
401express newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 17property and  the making  of contracts for any purpose. such
executive power  of the  union is  vested in  the  president
under  art.53(1)  and  shall  be  exercised  by  him  either
directly  or   through  officers   subordinate  to   him  in
accordance with  the constitution.  all executive actions of
the government of india shall be expressly taken in the name
of the  president under  art.77(1).  under  cl.(2)  thereof,
orders and  other instruments  made and executed in the name
of the  president shall be authenticated as may be specified
in rules  to be  made by  the president  i.e. in  the manner
specified  under   the  authentication   (orders  and  other
instruments) rules,  1958 framed  under art. 72(2). in terms
of the  government of  india (allocation of business) rules,
1961, all  matters relating  to the  property of  the union,
allotment of  government lands  in delhi,  administration of
government estates  under the  control of  the  ministry  of
works &  housing  and  the  administration  of  the  land  &
development office,  are matters  exclusively vested  in the
ministry of  works &  housing vide  entries 1,6 and 23(1) in
the second  schedule under  the head  `ministry of  works  &
housing'. in  the light  of the  said directive,  as further
confirmed by  the constitutionally  enacted regulations, the
power over  the allotment  of nazul lands, administration of
leases in delhi and the control and administration of land &
development office  in particular  and the  property of  the
union in  general  are  subjects  vested  solely  under  the
control of the ministry of works & housing. in the premises,
by such  transfer of  authority, the  chief commissioner  of
delhi and  necessarily  his  successor,  the  lt.  governor,
became bereft  of his  powers to  control and administer the
lease and  any attempt  by respondent no.2 to set up a claim
that  the   lt.  governor  is  the  authority  empowered  to
administer the  lease is  wholly frivolous and untenable and
must be rejected. [502 f; 503 a-c; e-g]
     mohd. maqbool damnoo v. state of jammu & kashmir [1972]
2 s.c.r.  1014 & edward mills co. ltd. beawar  ors. v. state
of ajmer & anr. [1955] 1 s.c.r. 735 distinguished.
     6(i)the impugned  notices dated march 1, 1980 and march
10, 1980 were not issued bona fide in the ordinary course of
official business  for implementation  of  the  law  or  for
securing justice  but were  actuated with  an  ulterior  and
extraneous purpose  ant  thus  were  wholly  mala  fide  and
politically motivated. [519 c]
     6(ii)fraud on  power voids  the  order  if  it  is  not
exercised  bona   fide  for  the  end  design.  there  is  a
distinction
402
between exercise  of power  in good  faith and misuse in bad
faith. the former arises when an authority misuses its power
in breach of law, say, by taking into account bona fide, and
with best  of intentions,  some  extraneous  matters  or  by
ignoring relevant  matters. that  would render  the impugned
act or  order ultra  vires. it  would be  a case of fraud onexpress newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 18powers. the  misuse in  bad faith   arises when the power is
exercised for  an improper motive, say, to satisfy a private
or personal  grudge or for wreaking vengeance of a minister.
a power  is  exercised  maliciously  if  its  repository  is
motivated  by  personal  animosity  towards  those  who  are
directly affected  by its  exercise. use  of a  power for an
`alien' purpose  other than  the one  for which the power is
conferred is  mala fide  use of  that  power.  some  is  the
position when an order is made for a purpose other than that
which finds  place in  the  order.  the  ulterior  or  alien
purpose clearly speaks of the misuse of the power. [507 f-h]
     6(iii) it  is not  for  the  parties  to  say  what  is
relevant or  not. the matter is one for the court to decide.
mala fides  on the  part of  the government  in power or its
functionaries would be sufficient to invalidate the impugned
notices. [505 f]
     6(iv)  the   petitioners  have  alleged  several  facts
imputing improper  motives which  have not been specifically
denied and  there is  only a  bare denial with the assertion
that the  facts are not relevant. mere denial of allegations
does  not   debar  the   courts  from   inquiring  into  the
allegations.  it   is  quite  evident  that  no  action  was
contemplated against the express newspapers pvt. ltd. by any
of the  respondents prior  to february  17, 1980. respondent
no.2 upon  assumption of  his office  as the lt. governor of
delhi on  that day  immediately set  on a  course of  action
against the  indian express which culminated in the issue of
the  impugned   notices.  it   cannot  be  doubted  that  is
initiative  to   call  for  the  files  from  the  municipal
corporation relating  to the construction of the new express
building was  an action  of his  own not provoked by anyone,
much less  at the  instance of respondent no.1, the union of
india, ministry  of works  & housing. the sequence of events
set in  motion immediately after his assumption of office as
the lt.  governor demonstrate  the extent  to which  and the
keenness with  which he  pursued the matter. it would appear
that the  entire administrative  machinery was  geared  into
action by  respondent no.2  and he `activated' the taking of
steps culminating in the issue of the impugned notices. [509
a-b; 515  a-b]
403
     6(v) the  dominant purpose  which  actuated  respondent
no.2 in  initiating governmental  action was not so much for
implementation of  the provisions  of the master plan or the
zonal development  plans framed  under the delhi development
act or  the observance  of the  relevant municipal  bye-laws
under the  delhi municipal corporation act, but to use these
provisions for  an `alien' purpose and in bad faith i.e. for
demolition of the express buildings with mark of retribution
or political  vendetta for the role of indian express during
the period  of emergency and thereafter and thereby to bring
about closure of the indian express.  [512 d-e]
     6(vi)  it   was  somewhat   strange  that  the  land  &express newspapers pvt. ltd. & ors vs union of india & ors on 7 october, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1902038/ 19development officer  who was  a  minor  functionary  of  the
ministry of  works &  housing should  have filed  a  counter
supporting the  action of respondent no.2. there is no doubt
that the  land &  development officer  deliberately made  an
inaccurate statement that he is not under the administrative
control of the ministry. [518 b]
     6(vii) the contention that there was imminent danger of
demolition of  the express.  building nor  was the  impugned
notice by  the engineer  officer a  notice of  re-entry upon
forfeiture of  lease, is  against  the  very  terms  of  the
impugned notice.  there is  a categoric  averment  that  the
grant of  sanction by  the then minister for works & housing
was illegal,  improper and irregular. it is therefore futile
to contend that the impugned notice dated march 10, 1980 was
not a notice of re-entry upon forfeiture of lease but merely
a  notice   of  an   exploratory  nature  requiring  express
newspapers pvt.  ltd. to show cause why the lease should not
be forfeiture under cl.5 of the lease-deed. [518 c-e]
     c.s.  rowjee  &  ors.  v.  a.p.  state  road  transport
corporation [1964] 4 s.c.r. 330 relied upon.
s. pratap  singh v. state of punjab  [1964] 4 s.c.r. 733