the  respondent employees were fined by the appellant  board
for  misconduct,duct  and various sums were  recovered  from
them.   therefore, they filed a claims application no.  5/72
under  section  33c   (2) of  the  industrial  disputes  art.
alleging  that the said punishment was imposed in  violation
of  the principles of natural justice.  the appellant  board
raised a preliminary objection before the labour court  that
the board, a statutory body performing what is in essence  a
regal  function  by  providing the basic  amenities  to  the
citizens,  is  not  an industry within the  meaning  of  the
expression  under  section 2(j) of the  industrial  disputes
act, and consequently the employees were not workmen and the
labour court had no jurisdiction to decide the claim of  the
workmen.   this  objection being over-ruled,  the  appellant
board  filed two writ 'petitions viz.  nos. 868 and 2439  of
1973  before  the karnataka high court  at  bangalore.   the
division  bench of that high court dismissed  the  petitions
and  held that the appellant board is "industry" within  the
meaning  'of  the  ,expression under  section  2(i)  of  the
industrial,  disputes  act, 1947.  the  appeals  by  special
leave,  considering "the chances of confusion from the  crop
'of cases in an area where the common man has to  understand
and apply the law and the desirability that there should be,
? comprehensive, clear and conclusive declaration as to what
is  an  industry  under the industrial disputes  act   as  it
stands" were placed for consideration by a larger bench.
held per m. h. beg, c.j. (concurring with bhagwati,  krishna
iyer and desai, jj.
1.   the term "analogous to the trade or business" could not
cut  down the scope of the term "industry".  the said  words
can  reasonably  mean only activity which results  in  goods
made and manufactured or service rendered which are  capable
of being converted into saleable ones.  they must be capable
of entering the world of "res commercium", although they may
be  kept out of the market for some reason.  it is  not  the
motive  of an activity in making goods or running a  service
but  the  possibility of making them marketable if  one  who
makes  goods  or  renders service so  desires,  that  should
determine  whether  the activity lies within the  domain  or
circle  of  industry.   but even this may not  be  always  a
satisfactory test.  by this test the type of services  which
are  rendered  purely for the satisfaction of  spiritual  or
psychological  urges  of persons  rendering  those  services
would  be  excluded.  whenever an industrial  dispute  would
arise between either employers and their workmen or  between
workmen and workmen, it should be considered an area  withinbangalore water-supply & ... vs r. rajappa & others on 21 february, 1978
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1149369/ 2the sphere of "industry" but not otherwise.  in other words,
the  nature  of  the  activity will  be  determined  by  the
conditions  which give rise to the likelihood of the  occur-
rence  of such disputes and their actual occurrence  in  the
sphere.
                                        [220d, g, 22 1 a-b]
*judgments published in the order and  date as delivered.
208
"d.   n. banerje's case [1953] scr 302; corporation of  city
of nagpur v. its employees [1960] 2 scr 942; state of bombay
and others v. the hospital mazdoor sabha and others [1960] 2
scr 866 referred to and followed.
3.   the term "sovereign should be reserved technically  and
more  correctly  for  the  sphere  of  ultimate   decisions.
sovereignty operates on a sovereign plane, of its own.  only
those  services  which are governed by  separate  rules  and
constitutional  provisions  such  as articles  310  and  311
should,  strictly  speaking be excluded from the  sphere  of
industry by a necessary implication.
                                            [221e, g]
h.   h.  kesvananda  bharati sripathagalavaru  v.  state  of
kerala [1973] supplemental s-c-r, page-1 referred to.
4.   the special excludes the applicability of the  general.
certain  public  utility services which are carried  out  by
governmental agencies or corporations are treated by the act
itself  as within the sphere of industry.  if express  rules
under  other enactments govern the relationship between  the
state  as an employer and its servants as employees, it  may
be  contended  on  the strength of such  provisions  that  a
particular  set  of employees are outside the scope  of  the
industrial disputes act. [221g-h, 222a]
5.   the  state  today  increasingly  undertakes  commercial
functions  and economic activities and services as  part  of
its  duties  in  a welfare  state.   hence  to  artificially
exclude  state-ran  industry  from the sphere  of  the  act,
unless  the statutory provisions expressly or  by  necessary
implication  have that effect, would not be correct.  [222f-
223a]
rajasthan  state electricity board v. mohanlal [1967] 3  scr
377;   rajasthan   v.  mst.   vidyawanti   &   anr.   [1962]
supplemental 2 scr 989 at 1002 referred to.
per chandrachud j.
1.   section  2(j)  of the industrial  disputes  act  (1947)
which defines, "industry" contains words of wide import,  as
wide as the legislature could have possibly made them.   the
problem  of what limitations could and should be  reasonably
read in interpreting the wide words used in section 2(j)  is
far  too.  policy oriented to be satisfactorily  settled  by
judicial  decisions.   the  parliament  must  step  in   and
legislate  in 'a manner which will leave no doubt as to  its
intention.  that alone can afford a satisfactory solution to
the question which has agitated and perplexed the  judiciary
at all levels. [284h, 286a-b]bangalore water-supply & ... vs r. rajappa & others on 21 february, 1978
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1149369/ 32.   hospital mazdoor sabha was correctly decided in so  far
as  it held that the jj group of hospitals was  an  industry
but  the  same cannot be said in regard to the view  of  the
court that certain activities ought to be treated as falling
outside the definition clause. [287c-d]
3.   there is no justification for excepting the  categories
of public utility activities undertaken by the government in
the  exercise  of  its  inalienable  function,.,  under  the
constitution,  call  it regal or sovereign or by  any  other
name,  from  the definition of "industry".  if it  be.  true
that one must have regard to the nature of the activity  and
not to who engages in it, it is beside the point to  enquire
whether  the  activity  is  undertaken  by  the  state,  and
further,  if so, whether it is undertaken in  fulfilment  of
the  state's constitutional obligations or in  discharge  of
its  constitutional  functions.   in fact,  to  concede  the
benefit of an exception to the state's activities which  are
in  the  nature  of sovereign functions is  really  to  have
regard  not so much to the nature of the activity as to  the
consideration  who engages in that activity; for,  sovereign
functions  can only be discharged by the state and not by  a
private  person.  if the state's inalienable  functions  are
excepted  from  the  sweep of the  definition  contained  in
section  2(j),  one  shall  have it is  the  nature  of  the
activity is an industry.  indeed, in this respect, it should
make no difference   whether
209
on  the one hand, an activity is undertaken by  a  corporate
body in the discharge of its statutory functions or, on  the
other,   by  the  state  itself  in  the  exercise  of   its
inalienable  functions.   if the water supply  and  sewerage
schemes   or   fire  fighting  establishments   run   by   a
municipality can be industries sought to be the  manufacture
of  coins and currency, arms and ammunition and the  winning
of  oil  and uranium.  the fact that these latter  kinds  of
activities are, or can only be, undertaken by the state does
not  furnish  any  answer  to  the  question  whether  these
activities  are  industries.  when undertaken by  a  private
individual they are industries, therefore, when under-
taken  by the state,they are industries.  the nature of  the
activity is the determining factor and that does not  change
according  to who undertakes it.  items 8, 11, 12, 17  and18
of  the first schedule read with section 2 (n) (vi)  of  the
industrial disputes act render support to this view.   these
provisions which were described in hospital mazdoor sabha as
'very  significant'  at  least  show  that,  conceivably,  a
defence establishment, a mint or a security press can be  an
industry  even though these activities are, ought to be  and
can only be undertaken by the state in the discharge of  its
constitutional obligations or functions.  the state does not
trade when it prints a currency note or strikes a  coin. and
yet,  considering the nature of the activity, it is  engaged
inan   industry when it does so. [287e-h, 288a-b]bangalore water-supply & ... vs r. rajappa & others on 21 february, 1978
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1149369/ 4     4. a systematic activity which is organised or arranged
in a mannerin   which the trade or business is generally
organised or arranged would bean   industry despite the
fact that it proceeds from charitable motives. it is inthe
nature  of the activity that one has to consider and  it  is
upon   the  application  of  that  test  that  the   state's
inalienable   functions  fall  within  the   definition   of
industry.   the very same principles must yield  the  result
that  just  as  the consideration as  to  who  conducts  the
activity, is irrelevant for determining whether the activity
is  an  industry  so  is  the  fact  that  the  activity  is
charitable  in  nature or is undertaken  with  a  charitable
motive.  the status or capacity corporate or constitutional,
of  the employer would have, if at all, closer  nexus,  than
his  motive  on  the question whether  the  activity  is  an
industry.   the  motive which propels the  activity  is  yet
another step removed and ex hypothesi can have no  relevance
on  the question as to what is the nature of  the  activity.
it is never true to say that the nature of the activities is
charitable.  the subjective motive force of an activity  can
be  charity  but  for the purpose  of  deciding  whether  an
activity  is  an  industry one has to look  at  the  process
involved in the activity, objectively.  the jural foundation
of  any  attempt to except charitable enterprises  from  the
scope  of the definition can only be that' such  enterprises
are  not undertaken for profit.  but then, that clearly,  is
to  introduce the profit concept by a, side wind, a  concept
which has been rejected consistently over the years.  if any
principle can be said to be settled law in this vexed  field
it  is  this : the twin consideration of profit  motive  and
capital investment is irrelevant for determining whether  an
activity  is an industry.  therefore, activities  which  are
dominated  by  charitable motives either in the  sense  that
they involve the rendering of free or near free services  or
in the sense that the profits which they yield are  diverted
to  charitable  purposes,  are not beyond the  pale  of  the
definition of section 2(j).  it is as much beside the  point
to  inquire who is the employer as it is to inquire, why  is
the activity undertaken and what the employer does with  the
profits, if any. [288c-h, 289a]
5.by  this test a solicitor's establishment would  be  an
industry.  a solicitor undoubtedly does not carry on a trade
or  business when he acts for his client or advises  him  or
pleads for him, if and when pleading is permissible to  him.
he  pursues a profession which is variously and  justifiably
described as learned, liberal or noble.  but it is difficult
to infer from the language of the definition in section 2(j)
that  the legislature could not have intended to bring in  a
liberal profession like that of an attorney within the ambit
of the definition of 'industry'. [289a-b]
national  union of commercial employees & another v.  m.  r.
meher. industrial tribunal bombay & ors. [1962] supplemental
3 scr 157 dissented from.bangalore water-supply & ... vs r. rajappa & others on 21 february, 1978
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1149369/ 5210
6.in  hospital mazdoor sabha the court while  evolving  a
working   principle  stated  that  an  industrial   activity
generally  involves,  inter  alia, the  cooperation  of  the
employer and the employees.  that the production of goods or
the rendering of material services to the community must  be
the  direct  and proximate result of such cooperation  is  a
further extension of that principle and it is broadly by the
application thereof that a solicitor's establishment is held
not  to  attract the definition clause.   these  refinements
are,  with  respect  not  warranted  by  the  words  of  the
definition,  apart from the consideration that  in  practice
they  make  the application of the  definition  to  concrete
cases   dependent  upon  a  factual  assessment  so   highly
subjective  as to lead to confusion and uncertainty  in  the
understanding of the true legal position.  granting that the
language  of the definition is so wide that some  limitation
ought  to be read into it, one must stop at a  point  beyond
which the definition will skid into a domain too rarefied to
be realistic.  whether the cooperation between the  employer
and  the  employee is the proximate cause  of  the  ultimate
product  and bears direct nexus with it is a test  which  is
almost   impossible  of  application  with  any  degree   of
assurance or certitude.  it will be as much true to say that
the solicitor's assistant, managing clerk, librarian and the
typist  do not directly contribute to the  intellectual  end
product  which  is a creation of his  personal  professional
skill,   as  that,  without  their  active  assistance   and
cooperation  it  will  be impossible  for  him  to  function
effectively.  the unhappy state of affairs in which the  law
is marooned will continue to baffle the skilled professional
and his employees alike as also the judge who has to perform
the  unenviable  task  of  sitting  in  judgment  over   the
directness  of the cooperation between the employer and  the
employee,  until  such time as the  legislature  decides  to
manifest  its  intention by the use of clear  and  indubious
language.   beside the fact that this court has so held  'in
national union of commercial employees the legislature  will
find a plausible case for exempting the learned and  liberal
professions  of  lawyers,  solicitors,  doctors,  engineers,
chartered  accountants  and the like from the  operation  of
industrial  laws.   but until that happens, in  the  present
state of the law it is difficult by judicial  interpretation
to  create  exemptions in favour of  any  particular  class.
[289c-h]
7.the  case  of the clubs, on the present  definition  is
weaker still.  the definition squarely covers them and there
is  no justification for amending the law so as  to  exclude
them  from the operation of the industrial laws.   the  fact
that  the running of clubs is not a calling of the  club  or
its managing committee, that the club has no existence apart
from  its  members  that it exists for  its  members  though
occasionally strangers take the benefit of its services  andbangalore water-supply & ... vs r. rajappa & others on 21 february, 1978
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1149369/ 6that even after the admission of guests, the club remains  a
members' self-serving institution does not touch the core of
the problem. [290a-b]
per  iyer  j.  (on behalf of bhagwati, j. j.  desai  j.  and
himself.)
(1)'industry  as  defined 'in sec. 2(j) and  explained  in
banerji's case has a wide import. [282a]
i.(a)  where (i) systematic activity, (ii)  organized  by
cooperation  between employer and employee (the  direct  and
substantial element is chimerical); (iii) for the production
and/or  distribution  of goods and  services  calculated  to
satisfy human wants and wishes (not spiritual or  religious,
but  inclusive  of  material things or  services  geared  to
celestial  bliss  e.g. making, on a large  scale  prasad  or
food),   prima  facie  there  is  an  'industry'   in   that
enterprise.
(b)  absence  of  profit  motive  or  gainful  objective  is
irrelevant, be the venturein the public, joint,  private
or other sector.
(c)  the  true focus is functional and the decisive test  is
the  nature  of the activity with special  emphasis  on  the
employer-employee relations.
(d)  if the organisation is a trade or business it does  not
cease to be one becauseof   philanthropy   animating   the
undertaking. [282a-c]
ii.  although   section  2(j)  uses  words  of  the   widest
amplitude  in  its  two  limbs,  their  meaning  cannot   be
magnified to overreach itself. [282d]
211
(a)'undertaking'    must   suffer   a    contextual    and
associational shrinkage as explained in banerji and in  this
judgment;  so  also, service, calling and  the  like.   this
yields the inference that all organized activity  possessing
the  triple  elements in i (supra), although  not  trade  or
business, may still be 'industry' provided the nature of the
activity,   viz.   the   employer-employee   basis.    bears
resemblance  to  what we find in trade  or  business.   this
takes into the fold of 'industry' undertakings, callings and
services, adventures' analogous to the carrying on of  trade
or  business'.  all features, other than the methodology  of
carrying on the activity viz. in organizing the  cooperation
between  employer and employee, may be dissimilar.  it  does
not,  matter, if on the employment terms there  is  analogy.
[282d-e]
iii.application  of these guidelines should not stop  short
of their logical reachby  invocation of creeds, cults  or
inner sense of incongruity or outer senseof   motivation
for  or resultant of the economic operations.  the  ideology
of the act being industrial peace, regulation and resolution
of  industrial  disputes between employer and  workmen,  the
range  of this statutory ideology must inform the  reach  of
the statutory definition.  nothing less, nothing more.
(a)the consequences are (i) professions, (ii) clubs  (iii)bangalore water-supply & ... vs r. rajappa & others on 21 february, 1978
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1149369/ 7educational  institutions  (iv) cooperatives,  (v)  research
institutes (vi) charitable projects and (vii) other  kindred
adventures,  if  they  fulfil the  triple  tests  listed  in
(supra), cannot be exempted from the scope of section 2(j).
(b)a    restricted   category   of,   professions,    clubs,
cooperatives  and even gurukulas and little  research  labs,
may   qualify   for  exemption  if,  in   simple   ventures,
substantially  and going by the dominant  nature  criterion,
substantively  no employees are entertained but  in  minimal
matters,  marginal employees are hired.  without  destroying
the non-employee character of the unit.
(c)if,  in  a  pious or altruistic  mission,  many  employ
themselves,  free  or for small honoraria  or  like  return,
mainly  drawn  by sharing in the purpose or cause,  such  as
lawyers volunteering to run a free legal services clinic  or
doctors  serving  in  their spare hours in  a  free  medical
centre on asramites working at the bidding of the  holiness,
divinity  or like central personality, and the services  are
supplied free or at nominal cost and those who serve are not
engaged  for  remuneration  or on the basis  of  master  and
servant  relationship,  then  the  institution  is  not   an
industry  even if stray servants, manual or  technical,  are
hired.   such  eleemosynary or like undertakings  alone  are
exempt-not   other  generosity,  compassion,   developmental
passion or project. [282f-h, 283a-c]
iv.  the dominant nature test :
(a)where  a complex of activities, some of  which  qualify
for  exemption, others not, involves employees on the  total
undertaking,  some  of  whom are not  'workmen'  as  in  the
university  of  delhi  case  or  some  departments  are  not
'productive  of goods and services if isolated,  even  then,
the  predominant nature of the services and  the  integrated
nature of the departments as explained in the corporation of
nagpur,  will be the true test.  the whole undertaking  will
be  'industry'  although  those who  are  not  'workmen'  by
definition may not benefit by the status.
(b)notwithstanding   the   previous   clauses,   sovereign
functions,   strictly  understood,  (alone),   qualify   for
exemption, not the welfare activities of economic adventures
undertaken by government or statutory bodies.
(c)even in departments discharging sovereign functions  if
there   are  units  which  are  industries  and   they   are
substantially severable, then they can be considered to come
within sec. 2(j).
(d)constitutionally  and competently  enacted  legislative
provisions  may  well  remove  from the  scope  of  the  act
categories which otherwise may be covered thereby. [283c-f]
212
management of safdarjung hospital, new delhi v. kuldip singh
sethi  [1971]  1 scr 177=air (1970)  s.c.  1407  dhanrajgiri
hospital  v. workmen air 1975 s.c. 2032, national  union  of
commercial  employees  & anr.  v. m.  r.  meher,  industrial
tribunal,  bombay air [1962] s.c. 1080.  rabindranath sen  &bangalore water-supply & ... vs r. rajappa & others on 21 february, 1978
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1149369/ 8ors.  v. first industrial tribunal, west bengal air  [1963],
cal. 310;. university of delhi & anr. v. ramnath & ors.  air
[1963] s.c. 1873; madras gymkhana club v.  employees'  union
v. management air [1968] s.c. 554. cricket club of india  v.
bombay  labour union & anr. [1969] 1 scr 600= air [1969]  sc
276 over-ruled;
hospital mazdoor's case air 1960 s.c. 610 approved.
per  jaswant  singh  j.  (on behalf  of  tulzapurkar  j  and
himself).
1.despite the width of the definition it could not be the
intention of the legislature that categories 2 and 3 of  the
charities alluded. to in the leading judgment, hospitals run
on  charitable  basis or as a part of the functions  of  the
government   or   local  bodies  like   municipalities   and
educational  and,  research  institutions  whether  run   by
private  entities or by government and liberal  and  learned
professions like that of doctors, lawyers and teachers,  the
pursuit  of  which  is dependent  upon  an  individuals  own
education,  intellectual attainments and  special  expertise
should fall within the pale of the definition.
                                          [290g-h, 291a]
2.the  definition  in s. 2(j) of the act  is  limited  to
those activities systematically or habitually undertaken  on
commercial   lines   by  private  entrepreneurs   with   the
cooperation of employees for the production or  distribution
of  goods or for the rendering of material services  to  the
community at large or a part of such community.  in the case
of  liberal professions, the contribution of the usual  type
of  employees employed by the professionals to the value  of
the  end product (viz. advice and services rendered  to  the
client)  is  so  marginal that the  end  product  cannot  be
regarded  as  the  fruit  of  the  cooperation  between  the
professional and his employees. [291a-c]
3.the  need  for excluding some  callings,  services  and
undertakings  from the purview of the  aforesaid  definition
has been felt and recognised by this court from time to time
while explaining the scope of the definition of' "industry".
[291c-d]
observation :
4.it  is high time that the legislature steps in  with  a
comprehensive bill to clean up the fog and remove the doubts
and set at rest once for all the controversy which crops  up
from  time  to  time  in relation  to  the  meaning  of  the
aforesaid term rendering it necessary for larger benches  of
this  court  to  be  constituted which  are  driven  to  the
necessity of evolving a working formula to cover  particular
cases. [292 a-b)]