supreme court of india
george da costa vs controller of estate duty in ... on 28 october, 1966
equivalent citations: 1967 air 849, 1967 scr (1)1004
author: v ramaswami
bench: ramaswami, v.
           petitioner:
george da costa
        vs.
respondent:
controller of estate duty in mysore,bangalore
date of judgment:
28/10/1966
bench:
ramaswami, v.
bench:
ramaswami, v.
shah, j.c.
bhargava, vishishtha
citation:
 1967 air  849            1967 scr  (1)1004
 citator info :
 r          1973 sc1170  (4)
 f          1973 sc1214  (10,11)
 rf         1975 sc 435  (11,12,23)
 f          1977 sc 463  (11,15,17)
 e          1980 sc 142  (9)
 rf         1986 sc 631  (5,7)
 r          1988 sc1426  (10)
act:
estate  duty  act,  1953  (act  34  of  1953),  s.  10-donor
continuing to reside in house after making gift of it to his
sons--residence-based only on filial affection-donor whether
'entirely  excluded  from possession and  enjoyment'  within
meaning of section-'by contract or otherwise', meaning of.
headnote:
the appellant's father purchased a house in the joint  names
of himself and his wife.  in 1954 the parents made a gift of
the said property to their two sons including the appellant.
the  document recited that the donees had accepted the  gift
and  they had been put in possession.  thereafter, the  sons
paid the municipal tax but the parents continued to  reside.
in  the  house and the father continued to  look  after  itsgeorge da costa vs controller of estate duty in ... on 28 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1946226/ 1affairs  as  head of the family.  the father died  in  1959,
more  than four years after the gift and the question  arose
in estate duty proceedings whether the said house was to  be
included  in the estate of the deceased for the  purpose  of
the  duty or not.  the assistant controller of  estate  duty
and  the  central  board  of  revenue  decided  against  the
appellant (who was the accountable per,son) and thereafter a
'reference  was  made to the high court.   that  court  also
having  given an adverse verdict the appellant came to  this
court.  it was contended on his behalf that the deceased had
no enforceable right against his sons and therefore s, 10 of
the estate duty act was not attracted to the case.
held  : the crux of s. 10 lies in two parts : (1) the  donee
must bona fide have assumed possession and enjoyment of  the
property  which  is, the subject-matter of the gift  to  the
exclusion  of the donor, immediately upon the gift, and  (2)
the  donee must have retained such possession and  enjoyment
of the property to the entire exclusion of the donor or  any
benefit  to  him  by  contract  or  otherwise.   both  these
conditions are cumulative.  unless each of them is satisfied
the  property would be liable to estate duty under s. 10  of
the act. [1007 g]
attorney-general  v. earl grey, [1898] 2 q.b.d. 534,  relied
on.
(ii)the  second part of s. 10 has two limbs : the  deceased
must  be  entirely excluded (i) from the property  and  (ii)
from  any  benefit  by  contract  or  otherwise.   the  word
'otherwise'  must be construed ejusdem generis and  must  be
interpreted  to mean some kind of legal obligation  or  some
transaction enforceable at law or equity which though not in
the  form of a contract may confer a benefit on  the  owner.
[1008 b]
but the words by contract or otherwise in the second limb of
the section will not control the words 'to the exclusion  of
the donor' in the first limb.  in other words to attract the
section it is not necessary that the possession of the donor
of  the gift must be referable to some contractual or  other
arrangement  enforceable in law or in equity.  even  if  the
donor  is content to rely upon the mere filial affection  of
his sons with a view to enable him to continue to reside  in
the  house it cannot be said that he was 'entirely  excluded
from possession and enjoyment' within the
1005
meaning of the first limb of the section, and therefore  the
property  will he deemed to have passed on the death of  the
donor and will be subject to the levy of estate duty.  [1008
e-g]
chick  v. commissioner of stamp duties of new  south  wales,
1958 a.c. 435 and commissioner of stamp duties of new  south
wales v. owens, 88 c.l.r. 67, relied on.
attorney-general  v. seccombe, [1911] 2 k.b.  688,  referred
to.
(iii)the  appellant  could not take  advantage  of  thegeorge da costa vs controller of estate duty in ... on 28 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1946226/ 2amendment  made  by the finance act, 1965 in s.  10   of  the
estate  duty  act, 1963.  the said amendment  was  effective
only from april 1, 1965 and was not retrospective.[1010 f]
(iv)it  was  the board's finding that though  the  property
stood  in the joint names of the deceased and his  wife  she
was  only a name-lender and the entire property belonged  to
the  deceased.  in view of this finding it was not  possible
to accept the argument of the appellant that only half share
of  the property should be taken for the purpose  of  estate
duty assistant. [1011 b]
judgment:
civil appellate jurisdiction : civil appeal no. 1098 of 1965 appeal by special leave from
the judgment and order dated november 17, 1964 of the mysore high court in tax referred case
no. 1 of 1964.
k. srinivasan and r. gopalakrishnan, for the appellant. b.sen, t. a. ramachandran and r. n.
sachthey, for the respondent.
the judgment of the court was delivered by ramaswami, j. this appeal is brought, by special leave,
from the judgment of the mysore high court dated november 17, 1964 in tax referred case no. 1 of
1964.
the property in question is house no. 34, mahatma gandhi road, bangalore. it had been purchased
by the appellant's father dr. c. f. da costa (hereinafter called the 'deceased') in the joint names of
himself and his wife on february 14, 1940. they made a gift of the house to their two sons on
october 20, 1954. the document recites that the donees had accepted the gift and they had been put
in possession. but the parents continued to be in possession of the house though the municipal tax
was paid thereafter in the names of the sons. the deceased died on september 30, 1959 more than 4
years after the gift. the appellant, the accountable person, then filed a return showing the value of
the estate left by his father at rs. 93,750/- excluding the value of the house no. 34, mahatma
gandhi road, bangalore. the assistant controller of estate duty however included the sum of rs.
1,50,000/- as the value thereof and determined the aggregate value of the estate at rs. 2,57,249/-
and assessed the estate duty payable at rs 15,751.54 p by his order dated november 30, 1959. the
appellant thereupon preferred an appeal to the central board of revenue (hereinafter referred to as
the 'board') which dismissed the appeal and affirmed the view taken by the assistant controller of
estate duty. at the instance of the appellant the board referred the following question of law for the
determination of the high court.
"whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the property at no. 34,
mahatma gandhi road, bangalore, was correctly included in the estate of the
deceased as property passing or deemed to pass on his death under section 10 of the
act?"george da costa vs controller of estate duty in ... on 28 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1946226/ 3the high court answered the question in the affirmative, holding that the appellant was liable to
pay estate duty with regard to the house.
under s. 5 of the estate duty act, 1953 (act no. 34 of 1953) (hereinafter called the 'act'), estate duty
is payable on the principal value of the estate of every person dying after the commencement of the
act. section 2(16) of the act defines the expression "property passing on death" and is to the
following effect :
"2. in this act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(16)"property passing on the death" includes property passing either immediately on
the death or after any interval, either certainly or contingently, and either originally
or by way of substitutive limitation, and 'on the death' includes 'at a period
ascertainable only by reference to the death";
section 10 of the act included in the expression "passing on death" even gifts made by a deceased in
certain circumstances. the section reads as follows :
"gifts whenever made where donor not entirely excluded. property taken under any
gift, whenever made, shall be deemed to pass on the donor's death to the extent that
bone fide possession and enjoyment of it was not immediately assumed by the donee
and thenceforward retained to the entire exclusion of the donor or of any benefit to
him by contract or otherwise :
provided that the property shall not be deemed to pass by reason only that it was,
not, as from the date of the gift, exclusively retained as aforesaid, if, by means of the
surrender of the reserved benefit or otherwise, it is subsequently enjoyed to the entire
exclusion of the donor or of any benefit to him for at least two years before the
death".
in the present case, the board has found that though the deceased had gifted the house in question
to his children four years before the date of his death, he still continued to stay in the house till his
death as the head of the family and also was looking after the affairs of the house. it was contended
on behalf of the appellant that upon these facts the high court erred in holding that s. 10 of the act
was attracted to the case and there was no exclusion of the donor from the bona fide possession and
enjoyment of the gifted property. it was said that the appellant's father did not have any right of
possession or enjoyment of the gifted property either in law or in equity and as the deceased had no
enforceable right the high court should have held that estate duty was not leviable under s. 10 of the
act and there was "entire exclusion of the donor" within the meaning of that section. in support of
his submission counsel for the appellant relied upon the decision of hamilton, j. in attorney
general v. seccombe.(1) the question involved in this appeal depends upon the proper
interpretation of s. 10 of the act. the intention of the legislature in enacting s. 10 of the act was to
exclude from liability to estate duty certain categories of gifts. a gift of immovable property under s.
10 will, however, be dutiable unless the donee assumes immediately exclusive and bona fidegeorge da costa vs controller of estate duty in ... on 28 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1946226/ 4possession and enjoyment of the subject-matter of the gift, and there is no beneficial interest
reserved to the donor by contract or otherwise. the section must be grammatically construed as
follows : "property taken under any gift, whenever made, of which property bona fide possession
and enjoyment shall not have been assumed by the donee immediately upon the gift, and of which
property bona fide possession and enjoyment shall not have been thenceforward retained by the
donee to the entire exclusion of the donor from such possession and enjoyment, or of any benefit to
him by contract or otherwise". the crux of the section lies in two parts : (1) the donee must bona fide
have assumed possession and enjoyment of the property, which is the subject matter of the gift to
the exclusion of the donor, immediately upon the gift, and (2) the donee must have retained such
possession and enjoyment of the property to the entire exclusion of the donor or of any benefit to
him by contract or otherwise. as a matter of construction we are of opinion that both these
conditions are cumulative. unless each of these conditions is satisfied, the property would be liable
to estate duty under s. 10 of the act. this view is borne out by the decision of the court of appeal in
attorney general v. earl grey(2) with regard to an analogous provision under s. 38(2) of the
customs and inland revenue (1) [1911] 2 k.b. 688.
(2) [1898] 2 q.b.d. 534, 541.
act, 1881, as amended by s. 1 1 of the customs and inland revenue act, 1889.
the second part of the section has two limbs :. the deceased must be entirely excluded (i) from the
property and (ii) from any benefit by contract or otherwise. it was argued for the appellant that the
expression, "by contract or otherwise" should be construed ejusdem generis and reference was made
to the decision of hamilton, j. in attorney general v. secombe.(1) on this aspect of the case we
think that the argument of the appellant is justified. in the context of the section the word
"otherwise" should, in our opinion, be construed ejusdem generis and it must be interpreted to
mean some kind of legal obligation or some transaction en- forceable at law or in equity which,
though not in the form of a contract, may confer a benefit on the donor. but it was contended by mr.
sen for the respondent that the case of the revenue does not rest upon the second limb of the
section but upon the first limb which requires that the donor must have been entirely excluded from
possession and enjoyment of the property. it was pointed out that there was no such exclusion in the
present case and the finding of the board is that the deceased continued to stay in the house till his
death as the head of the family and was looking after the affairs of the household. it was conten- ded
therefore that the first limb of the section is not satisfied in this case and the property must be held
to pass on the death of the deceased under that section. in our opinion, the contention of the
respondent must be accepted as correct. as a matter of construction we hold that the words "by
contract or otherwise" in the second limb of the section will not control the words "to the entire
exclusion of the donor" in the first limb. in other words, in order to attract the section it is not
necessary that the possession of the donor of the gift must be referable to some contractual or other
arrangement enforcement in law or in equity. even if the donor is content to rely upon the mere
filial affection of his sons with a view to enable him to continue to reside in the house, it cannot be
said that he was "entirely excluded from possession and enjoyment" within the meaning of the first
limb of the section, and therefore the property will be deemed to have passed on the death of the
donor and will be subject to levy of estate duty.george da costa vs controller of estate duty in ... on 28 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1946226/ 5on behalf of the appellant strong reliance was placed upon the decision of the court of appeal in
attorney general v. seccombe(1) which has already been referred to. in that case, the deceased
made an absolute gift of a house and furniture to a relative, without any stipulation, but continued
to live there as the donee's guest until his death more than five years later. upon the death of the
donor the crown claimed estate duty upon the value of the property upon (1) [1911] 2 k.b. 688.
the ground that bona fide possession and enjoyment of the property were not assumed by the donor
and thenceforward retained 'to the entire exclusion of the donor, or of any benefit to him by contract
or otherwise'. it was observed by hamilton, j. that there was no legally enforceable arrangement
permitting the deceased to reside in the house and the deceased was simply the guest of the donee
and was fully content to rely upon the affection which the donee bore towards him. it was therefore
held in that case that estate duty was not payable. it was stated by hamilton, j. in the course of his
judgment that the exclusion of the deceased from the property itself (the first limb of the condition)
would, like his exclusion "from any benefit by contract or otherwise" (the second limb), be achieved
unless he had "some enforceable right". the view taken by hamilton, j. on this particular point is,
however, not
-consistent with the opinion of the judicial committee in chick v. commissioner of stamp duties of
new south wales(1) which is a decision on a similarly worded clause of a new south wales statute.
in that case, the deceased gave his son a farming property, "mia mia," in 1934; in 1935 the deceased,
the son and another soil entered into a partnership agreement as graziers and stock dealers, on the
terms, inter alia, that the deceased should be the manager and that his decision should be final in all
matters relating to the conduct of the business; that the capital should consist of the livestock and
plant owned by the partners: that the business should be conducted on their respective holdings
(including "mia mia"); and that the land held by each partner should be his sole property and he
should have the sole and free right to deal with it as he might "think fit. the partnership continued
till the death of the deceased in 1952, and the property "mia mia" was held dutiable as a gift not to
his entire exclusion. there is a decision to a similar effect in commissioner of stamp duties of new
south wales v. owens(2) which was a case under the new south wales statute. it appears that there
was a verbal partnership between the deceased and his son under which they farmed two properties,
owned by the deceased, the profits being shared as to two-thirds to the deceased and one-third to
the son. some years later the deceased transferred one of the properties to the son expressly free of
all conditions, so that the son could have farmed it independently; in fact they farmed it and shared
the profits equally for some eleven years up to the date of death. the australian court found that
"there was a gift of an estate in fee simple, carrying the fullest right known to the law of exclusive
possession and enjoyment"; but that the farming and profit sharing were inconsistent with the
deceased's "exclusion", and that duty was therefore chargeable. in an earlier case-o' connor v.
commissioner of stamp duties (south a stralia)(3) (1) [1958] a.c 435.
(3) 47 c.l.r. 601.
(2) 88 c.l. r. 67.george da costa vs controller of estate duty in ... on 28 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1946226/ 6which was a decision under a south australian enactment couched in a similar language, the
deceased was given a power of attorney by the donee and continued to farm the donated lands and
was not in fact required to account for the profits, though he could evidently have been required to
do so. but it was again held that duty was chargeable on the donated lands. it appears from all these
cases that the first limb of the section may be infringed if the donor occupies or enjoys the property
or its income, even though be has no right to do so which he could legally enforce against the donee.
"where the question is whether the donor has been entirely excluded from the subject-matter of the
gift, that is the single fact to be determined. if he has not been so excluded, the eye need look no
further to see whether his non-exclusion has been advantageous or otherwise to the
donee".(viscount simonds in chick v. commissioner of stamp duties of new south wales.(1) it was
then pointed out on behalf of the appellant that the finance act of 1965 has amended s. 10 of the
estate duty act, 1953 by introducing the following proviso "provided further that a house or part
thereof taken under any gift made to the spouse, son, daughter, brother or sister, shall not be
deemed to pass on the donor's death by reason only of the residence therein of the donor except
where a right of residence therein is reserved or secured directly or indirectly to the donor under the
relevant disposition or under any collateral disposition."
it was argued that this proviso must be taken as legislative interpretation of the section as it stood
previous to the amendment and since no right of residence was reserved or secured to the donor
under the deed of gift or under any collateral disposition, the imposition of estate duty was not
justified,. we are unable to accept this argument as correct. the amendment brought about by the
finance act, 1965 was effective only from april 1, 1965 and was not retrospective. we think that the
insertion of the second proviso to the section must be taken to have been made deliberately by
parliament to be effective from the date of the amendment. we therefore see no reason for holding
that the earlier provision in s. 10 should be interpreted with reference to the language of the
amendment brought about by the finance act of 1965. we accordingly reject the argument of mr.
srinivasan on this point.
it was lastly contended for the appellant that in any event the property in question belonged jointly
to the mother and father of the appellant and the whole property could not be deemed to have
passed upon the death of the father under  s. 5 of the act. the question was examined by the board
which found that the (1) [1958] a.c. 435.
property was purchased entirely out of the funds of the deceased that for the purpose of income tax
the deceased had declared the entire property as his own, and that the income therefrom was
exclusively assessed in his hands. on these facts the board held that though the property stood in
the joint names of the deceased and his wife, she was merely a name-lender and the entire property
belonged to the deceased and was rightly included in his estate for the purpose of estate duty. in
view of this finding of fact it is not possible to accept the argument of the appellant that only half the
share of the property should be taken for the purpose of estate duty assessment.
for the reasons expressed, we hold that the decision of the high court is correct and this appeal
must be dismissed with, costs.george da costa vs controller of estate duty in ... on 28 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1946226/ 7g.c.
appeal dismissedgeorge da costa vs controller of estate duty in ... on 28 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1946226/ 8