supreme court of india
sanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
equivalent citations: 1961 air 715, 1961 scr (3) 120
author: k subbarao
bench: subbarao, k.
           petitioner:
sanwat singh & others
        vs.
respondent:
state of rajasthan
date of judgment:
09/12/1960
bench:
subbarao, k.
bench:
subbarao, k.
imam, syed jaffer
dayal, raghubar
citation:
 1961 air  715            1961 scr  (3) 120
 citator info :
 rf         1963 sc 200  (17)
 e          1965 sc  26  (4,6,14)
 r          1965 sc 257  (8)
 r          1966 sc1775  (4)
 rf         1967 sc1412  (5)
 r          1971 sc 460  (13)
 rf         1971 sc1977  (11)
 f          1972 sc 116  (22)
 rf         1972 sc 622  (28,32)
 r          1972 sc2020  (7)
 f          1972 sc2679  (8,9)
 r          1973 sc  55  (8)
 rf         1973 sc 399  (3)
 rf         1973 sc1204  (7)
 rf         1973 sc2241  (5,6)
 f          1973 sc2443  (19)
 rf         1973 sc2622  (7)
 r          1974 sc 286  (5)
 f          1974 sc 606  (7,9)
 r          1974 sc 902  (26)
 r          1979 sc 387  (9)
 r          1979 sc 391  (12)
 r          1986 sc 606  (15)
 r          1988 sc2154  (10)sanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40914/ 1act:
appeal-against  acquittal-principles  to  be  followed-"sub-
stantial and compelling reason"--meaning and scope  of-power
of court-constitution of india, art. 136.
headnote:
there were two rival factions in a certain village one  con-
sisting  of  rajputs  and the other of  cultivators.   on  a
particular festival day both the groups went to a temple for
worship  and  cultivators  who  reached  the  temple   first
occupied  a  place  therein which was  usually  occupied  by
rajputs.   subsequently  rajputs arrived  and  resented  the
occupation  of the sitting place by the  cultivators.   they
shifted  to  a  short distance and  after  holding  a  brief
conference  came  back  to  the  temple  and  attacked   the
cultivators  with  guns, swords and lathis as  a  result  of
which  several persons were injured and two were killed.  43
persons  alleged to have taken part in the rioting were  put
up for trial before the sessions judge for having  committed
offences  under  s. 302 read with s. 149 and s. 148  of  the
indian  penal code.  the sessions judge held that  a  common
object  on the part of the accused to kill  the  cultivators
had  not  been  established and that it had  also  not  been
proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused were  guilty
of  a  particular offence.  on these findings  the  sessions
judge  acquitted all the accused.  on appeal the high  court
after  examining  the  entire evidence  found  some  of  the
accused guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to  murder
under s. 304 read with s. 149 and s. 148 of the indian penal
code  and sentenced them to various terms  of  imprisonment.
the appeal in respect of some other accused was dismissed as
no case had been made out against them beyond any reasonable
doubt on appeal by special leave against the conviction  and
sentence by the high court,
held,  that the words "substantial and  compelling  reasons"
for  setting aside an order of acquittal used by this  court
in  its decisions were intended to convey the idea  that  an
appellate  court shall not only bear in mind the  principles
laid  down  by the privy council in sheo swarup's  case  but
must  also  give  its  clear  reasons  for  coming  to   the
conclusion that the order of acquittal was wrong.
the following results emanate from a discussion of the  case
law on appeals against acquittal:-
(1)an  appellate  court  has  full  power  to  review  the
evidence  upon which the order of acquittal is founded;  (2)
the principles
121
laid  down in sheo swarup's case afford a correct guide  for
the  appellate court's approach to a case disposing of  such
an  appeal;  (3)  the  different  phraseology  used  in  the
judgments  of  this  court, such  as  (1)  "substantial  andsanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40914/ 2compelling  reasons",  (ii) "good  and  sufficiently  cogent
reasons",  and (iii) "strong reasons", are not  intended  to
curtail  the  undoubted power of an appellate court    in an
appeal  against acquittal to review the entire evidence  and
to come to its own conclusion, but in doing so it should not
only consider every matter on record having a bearing on the
questions  of fact and the reasons given by the court  below
in  support  of  its order of acquittal  in  arriving  at  a
conclusion on those facts, but should express the reasons in
its  judgment, which led it to hold that the  acquittal  was
not justified.
sheo swarup v. king emperor, (1934) l. r. 61 i. a. 398, con-
sidered and followed.
nur  mohammad  v. emperoy, a.i.r. 1945  p.c.  151,  surajpal
singh  v. the state, [1952] s.c.r. 193, ajmer singh  v.  the
state  of  punjab,  [1953] s.c.r` 418,  puran  v.  state  of
punjab,  a.i.r.  1953 s.c. 459, c. m.  narayan v.  state  of
travancore-cochin,  a.i.r. 1953 s.c. 478, tulsiram  kanu  v.
the  state,  a.i.r. 1954 s.c. 1, madan mohan  singh's  case,
a.i.r.  1954  s.c. 637, zwinglee ariel v. state  of  u.  p.,
a.i.r.  1954  s.c. 15, rao shiv bahadur singh  v.  state  of
vixdhya pradesh, a.i.r. 1954 s.c. 322, s.  a. a. biyabani v.
the state of madras, a.i. r. 1954 s.c. 645, aher raja  khima
v.  the state of saurashtra, [1955] 2 s.c.r.  1285,  bhagwan
das  v.  the state of rajasthan, a.i.r. 1957  s.c.  589  and
balbir  singh  v.  state of punjab, a.i.r.  1957  s.c.  216,
discussed.
the  high court approached the instant case from  a  correct
perspective and gave definite findings on a consideration of
the entire evidence, and in so doing it did not depart  from
any of the principles laid down by the privy council in sheo
swarup's  case  and also gave reasons for holding  that  the
acquittal was not justified.
abdul gani v. state of m. p., a.i.r. 1954 s.c. 31,  referred
to.
although  the  powers of this court under art.  136   of  the
constitution  are very wide, interference is  not  permitted
unless  "by disregard to the forms of legal process or  some
violation of the principles of natural justice or otherwise,
substantial and grave injustice has been done," on questions
of  fact  the  practice of this court is  not  to  interfere
except in exceptional cases when the finding is such that it
shocks the conscience of this court,
judgment:
criminal appellate jurisdiction: criminal appeal no. 119 of 1958.
appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated july 29, 1957, of the rajasthan high
court, jodhpur, in criminal appeal no. 42 of 1954.sanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40914/ 3b. l. kohli and c. l. sareen, for the appellants. s. k. kapur and d. gupta, for the respondent. 1960.
december 9. the judgment of the court was delivered by subba rao, j.-this is an appeal by
special leave against the conviction and sentence by the high court of judicature for rajasthan at
jodhpur of the 9 appellants under s. 304, read with s. 149, and s. 148 of the indian penal code. the
9 appellants, along with 34 other persons, were accused before the sessions judge, merta. briefly
stated the case of the prosecution was as follows: there were two factions in village harnawa-one
consisting of rajputs and other of the cultivators of the village. admittedly there were disputes
between these two factions in respect of certain fields. at about 3-30 p.m. on october 31, 1951, the
day after diwali, popularly known as ram ram day, both the groups went to a temple called
baiji-kathan. the cultivators went first to the temple and sat in the place which was usually occupied
by the rajputs. subsequently when the rajputs went there, they found their usual sitting place
occupied by the cultivators and took that as an insult to them. though they were invited by the
pujari to sit in some other place, they refused to do so and went to a banyan tree which was at a
short distance from the temple. there they held a brief conference and then returned to the temple
armed with guns, swords and lathies. the rajputs fired a few shots at the cultivators and also beat
them with swords and lathies. as a result, 16 of the cultivators received injuries and of these 6
received gun-shot injuries, of which two persons, namely, deena and deva, succumbed to the
injuries. out of the remaining 14 injured persons, 3 received grievous injuries and the rest simple
ones. forty- three persons, alleged to have taken part in the rioting, were put up for trial before the
sessions judge,, merta, for having committed offences under s. 302, read with  s. 149, and  s. 148 of
the indian penal code. five of the accused admitted their presence at the scene of occurrence but
pleaded that after they had made their customary offerings at the temple and when they were
returning they were attacked by the cultivators. others pleaded alibi.
the learned sessions judge held that it had not been established that the accused had a common
object to kill the cultivators and that it had also not been proved beyond any reasonable doubt that
any of the accused was guilty of a particular offence. on these findings, he acquitted all the accused.
on appeal the learned judges of the high court found that the accused were members of an
unlawful assembly, that they were animated by a common object of beating the cultivators and that
further out of the 43 accused it had been clearly established that the appellants, who are 9 in
number, took part in the activities of the unlawful assembly. on that finding they held that the
accused were guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder under s. 304, read with  s. 149,
indian penal code; they also held that appellants 1, 2, 3 and 4 were also guilty under s. 148 of the
indian penal code, as they were armed with deadly weapons, and the rest under  s. 147, indian
penal code. for the offence under  s. 304, read with s. 149, the appellants were sentenced to ten
years' rigorous imprisonment, and for the offence under  s. 148, appellants 1 to 4 were further
sentenced to one year's rigorous imprisonment and the rest under s. 147, to six months' rigorous
imprisonment. having examined the entire evidence, they agreed with the learned sessions judge
that no case had been made out against the other accused beyond any reasonable doubt. the appeal
was, therefore, allowed in respect of the nine appellants and dismissed in respect of the others
learned counsel for the appellants contended that the sessions judge came to a reasonable
conclusion on the evidence and that the. high court had no substantial and compelling reasons to
take a different view. in recent years the words "compelling reasons" have become words of magicsanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40914/ 4incantation in every appeal against acquittal. the words are so elastic that they are not capable of
easy definition; with the result, their interpretation varied between two extreme views-one holding
that if a trial court acquitted an accused, an appellate court shall not take a different view unless the
finding is such that no reasonable person will come to that conclusion, and the other accepting only
the conscience of the appellate court as the yardstick to ascertain whether there are reasons to
compel its interference. in the circumstances we think it necessary to clarify the point. the scope of
the powers of an appellate court in an appeal against acquittal has been elucidated by the privy
council in sheo swarup v. king-emperor there lord russell observed at p. 404 thus:
"........ the high court should and will always give proper weight and consideration to
such matters as (1) the views of the trial judge as to the credibility of the witnesses,
(2) the presumption of innocence in favour of the accused, a presumption certainly
not weakened by the fact that he has been acquit-
ted at his trial, (3) the right of the accused to the benefit of any doubt, and (4) the slowness of an
appellate court in disturbing a finding of fact arrived at by a judge who had the advantage of seeing
the witnesses adverting to the facts of the case, the privy council proceeded to state, "........ they
have no reason to think that the high court failed to take all proper matters into consideration in
arriving at their conclusions of fact."
these two passages indicate the principles to be followed by an appellate court in disposing of an
appeal against acquittal and also the proper care it should take in re- evaluating the evidence. the
privy council explained its earlier observations in nur mohammad v. emperor (2) thus at p. 152:
"their lordships do not think it necessary to read it all again, but would like to
observe that there really is only one principle, in the strict use of the word, laid down
there; that is that the high (1) (1934) l.r. 61 i.a. 398.
(2) a.i.r. 1945 p.c. 151.
court has full power to review at large all the evidence upon which the order of
acquittal was founded, and to reach the conclusion that upon that evidence the order
of acquittal should be reversed."
these two decisions establish that the power of an appellate court in an appeal against acquittal is
not different from that it has in an appeal against conviction; the difference lies more in the manner
of approach and perspective rather than in the content of the power. these decisions defining the
scope of the power of an appellate court had been followed by all the courts in india till the year 1951
when, it is said, this court in surajpal singh v. the state (1) laid down a different principle. but a
perusal of that judgment does not bear out the construction which is very often placed thereon. the
passage relied upon is found at p. 201 and it reads thus:
"it is well-established that in an appeal under section 417 of the criminal procedure
code, the high court has full power to review the evidence upon which the order ofsanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40914/ 5acquittal was founded, but it is equally well settled that the presumption of innocence
of the accused is further reinforced by his acquittal by the trial court, and the findings
of the trial court which had the advantage of seeing the witnesses and hearing their
evidence can be reversed only for very substantial and compelling reasons."
on the facts of that case this court held, "we are inclined to hold that the sessions judge had taken a
reasonable view of the facts of the case, and in our opinion there were no good reasons for reversing
that view". we think that these observations are nothing more than a restatement of the law laid
down by the privy council and the application of the same to the facts of the case before the court.
though in one paragraph the learned judges used the words "substantial and compelling reasons"
and in the next paragraph the words "good reasons", these observations were not intended to record
any disagreement (1)[1952] s.c.r. 193.
with the observations of lord russell in sheo swarup's case (1) as to matters a high court would
keep in view when exercising its power under s. 417 of the criminal procedure code. if it had been
so intended, this court would have at least referred to sheo swarup's case (1), which it did not. the
same words were again repeated by this court in ajmer singh v. the state of punjab (2). in that case
the appellate court set aside an order of acquittal on the ground that the accused had failed to
explain the circumstances appearing against him. this court held that as the presumption of
innocence of an accused is reinforced by the order of acquittal, the appellate court could have
interfered only for substantial and compelling reasons. the observations made in respect of the
earlier decisions applied to this case also. mahajan, j., as he then was, delivering the judgment of
the court in puran v. state of punjab (3) again used the words "very substantial and compelling
reasons", but immediately thereafter the learned judge referred to the decision of sheo swarup's
case(1) and narrated the circumstances which an appellate court should bear in mind in interfering
with an order of acquittal. this juxtaposition of the so-called formula and the circumstances
narrated in sheo swarup's case (1) indicate that the learned judge used those words only to
comprehend the statement of law made by the privy council. mukherjea, j., as he then was, in c. m.
narayan v.state of travancore- cochin (4) again referred to theprivy council decision and affirmed
the wide powerof an appellate court and also the proper approach in an appeal against acquittal. the
learned judge did not introduce any further limitation on the power of the appellate court. but it
was observed that the high court had not clearly kept before it the well settled principles and
reversed the decision of the trial court 'without noticing or giving due weight and consideration to
important matters relied upon by that court'. in tulsiram kanu v. the state (5) this (1) (1934) l.r.
61 i.a. 398.
(2) [1953] s.c.r. 418.
(3) a i.r. 1933 s.c. 459.
(4) a.i.r. 1953 s.c. 478.
(5) a.i.r. 1954 8.c. i.sanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40914/ 6court used a different phraseology to describe the approach of an appellate court against an order of
acquittal. there the sessions court expressed that there was clearly reasonable doubt in respect of
the guilt of the accused on the evidence put before it. kania, c. j., observed that it required good and
sufficiently cogent reasons to overcome such reasonable doubt before the appellate court came to a
different conclusion. this observation was made in connection with a high court's judgment which
had not taken into consideration the different detailed reasons given by the sessions judge. in
madan mohan singh's case (1), on appeal by special leave, this court said that the high court 'had
not kept the rules and principles of administration of criminal justice clearly before it and that
therefore the judgment was vitiated by non-advertence to and misapprehension of various material
facts transpiring in evidence and the consequent failure to give true weight and consideration to the
findings upon which the trial court based its decision'. in zwinglee ariel v. state of m. p. (2) this
court again cited the passage from the decision of the privy council extracted above and applied it
to the facts of that case. in rao shiv bahadur singh v. state of vindhya pradesh(1), bhagwati, j.,
speaking for the court, after referring to an earlier decision of this court, accepted the principle laid
down by the privy council and, indeed, restated the observations of the privy council in four
propositions. it may be noticed that the learned judge did not use the words cc substantial and
compelling reasons". in s. a. a. biyabani v. the state of madras (4), jagannadhadas, j., after
referring to the earlier decisions, observed at p. 647 thus:
"while no doubt on such an appeal the high court was entitled to go into the facts
and arrive at its own estimate of the evidence, it is also settled law that, where the
case turns on oral evidence of witnesses, the estimate of such evidence by the trial
court is not to be lightly set aside."
(1) a.i.r. 1954 s.c. 637. (2) a.i.r. 1954 s.c. 15. (3) a i.r. 1954 s.c. 322. (4) a.i.r. 1954 s.c. 645.
the learned judge did not repeat the so-called formula but in effect accepted the approach of the
privy council. the question was again raised prominently in the supreme court in aher raja khima
,"v. the state of saurashtra(1). bose, j., expressing the majority view, stated at p. 1287 thus:
"it is, in our opinion, well settled that it is not enough for the high court to take a
different view of the evidence; there must also be substantial and compelling reasons
for holding that the trial court was wrong: ajmer singh v. state of punjab (2); and if
the trial court takes a reasonable view of the facts of the case, interference under
section 417 is not justifiable unless there are really strong reasons for reversing that
view."
it may be noticed that the learned judge equated "substantial and compelling reasons" with "strong
reasons". kapur, j., in bhagwan das v. state of rajasthan(1) referred to the earlier decisions and
observed that the high court should not set aside an acquittal unless there are " substantial and
compelling reasons" for doing so. in balbir singh v. state of punjab (4), this court observed much to
the same effect thus at p. 222:sanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40914/ 7"it is now well settled that though the high court has full power to review the
evidence upon which an order of acquittal is founded, it is equally well settled that
the presumption of innocence of the accused person is further reinforced by his
acquittal by the trial court and the views of the trial judge as to the credibility of the
witnesses must be given proper weight and consideration; and the slowness of an
appellate court in disturbing a finding of fact arrived at by a judge who had the
advantage of seeing the witnesses must also be kept in mind and there must be
substantial and compelling reasons for the appellate court to come to a conclusion
different from that of the trial judge."
these observations only restate the principles laid down by this court in earlier decisions. there are
(1) [1955] 2 s.c.r. 1285.
(2) [1953] s.c.p. 418, 423.
(3) a.i. r. 1957 s.c. 689.
(4) a.i.r. 1957 s.c. 216.
other decisions of this court where, without discussion, this court affirmed the judgments of the
high courts where they interfered with an order of acquittal without violating the principles laid
down by the privy council. there is no difficulty in applying the principles laid down by the privy
council, and accepted by this court, to the facts of each case. but appellate courts are finding
considerable difficulty in understanding the scope of the words "substantial and compelling
reasons" used by this court in the decisions cited above. this court obviously did not and could not
add a condition to s. 417 of the criminal procedure code. the words were intended to convey the
idea that an appellate court not only shall bear in mind the principles laid down by the privy council
but also must give its clear reasons for coming to the conclusion that the order of acquittal was
wrong.
the foregoing discussion yields the following results: (1) an appellate court has full power to review
the evidence upon which the order of acquittal is founded; (2) the principles laid down in sheo
swarup's case(1) afford a correct guide for the appellate court's approach to a case in disposing of
such an appeal; and (3) the different phraseology used in the judgments of this court, such as,
(i) "substantial and compelling reasons", (ii) "good and sufficiently cogent reasons", and (iii) "strong
reasons" are not intended to curtail the undoubted power of an appellate court in an appeal against
acquittal to review the entire evidence and to come to its own conclusion; but in doing so it should
not only consider every matter on record having a bearing on the questions of fact and the reasons
given by the court below in support of its order of acquittal in its arriving at a conclusion on those
facts, but should also express those reasons in its judgment, which lead it to hold that the acquittal
was not justified.sanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40914/ 8with this background we shall now look at the judgment of the sessions judge and that of the high
(1) (1934) l.r. 61 i.a. 398.
court to ascertain whether the high court anywhere departed from the principles laid down by the
privy council. the framework of the judgment of the learned sessions judge may be shortly stated
thus: the first question was whether the case of the prosecution that the rajputs met. under a
banyan tree, conspired to beat the jats and came back to the temple armed with weapons was true.
this fact was spoken to by several eve-witnesses, including goga (p.w. 1), chandra (p.w. 2) and
doongar singh (p.w. 21). this fact was also mentioned in the first information report lodged by
doongar singh (p.w. 21). there were 20 eyewitnesses who spoke about the conspiracy; and, out of
them, p.ws. 5, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18. 19. 24 and 25 received injuries during the riot. the learned
sessions judge considered the evidence of p.ws. 1 and 2 and rejected it on unsubstantial grounds
and on the basis of insignificant discrepancies. therefter, he noticed that all the other eye-witnesses,
with slight and inconsequential variations, spoke to the fact of their returning from the banyan tree
with lathies, swords and guns' but he did not give a definite finding whether he accepted that
evidence or not, though at the fag end of the judgment he found that he could not hold that the
assembly of rajputs had any common object of killing anybody. then the learned sessions judge
proceeded to consider whether any of the rajputs were recognized by any of the witnesses. he
divided the accused into three groups, namely, (i) those accused who were amongst the rajputs
when they had come for darshan of baiji, (ii) those accused who were amongst the rajputs when
they returned from the banyan tree but for whom the evidence of taking part in the actual rioting is
divided, and (iii) those accused for whom most of the eye- witnesses have stated that they had
committed rioting and inflicted injuries on the assembly of cultivators. taking the first group, the
learned sessions judge, for the reasons given by him earlier, rejected the evidence of goga and
chandra, pointed out that 28 accused had not been named unanimously by all the eye-witnesses,
noticed that there was long standing enmity between the rajputs and the cultivators, and laid down
a criterion that, for determining the presence of any particular accused, there should be an
allegation against him about doing any overt act in the unlawful, assembly. by applying the said
yardstick he held that none of the accused falling in the first group, which included appellants 7, 8
and 9, was guilty of the offences with which they were charged. coming to the second category, with
which we are not concerned in this appeal, the learned sessions judge again applied the test that an
overt act should be proved against each of the accused and held that no case had been made out
against them. adverting to the third group, after noticing that 12 of the eye-witnesses were those
who received injuries, the learned sessions judge applied another test for accepting their evidence.
in effect and substance the test adopted by him was that an accused identified only by one witness
and not proved to have done any overt act should be acquitted by giving him the benefit of doubt.
applying this test to the said witnesses he held that the said accused were not guilty. after
considering the evidence in the aforesaid manner, he came to the following final conclusion:
"i cannot hold that the assembly of rajputs had any common object of killing
anybody. all happened at the spur of the moment. those rajputs who took part in
the rioting have not been truthfully named. innocent persons have been implicated
and the cases of those persons who are alleged to have committed any overt acts are
also full of doubts."sanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40914/ 9on appeal the learned judges of the high court, as already stated, allowed the appeal in respect of
the 9 appellants and dismissed it in regard to the others. the learned judges of the high court
observed that it had not the slightest hesitation in holding that the case put forward by the
prosecution, by and large, represented the substantial truth and that the incidents at the banyan tree
were true. they pointed out that the reasons given by the sessions judge for not believing the
evidence of the main witnesses, goga and chandra, who spoke as to what happened at the banyan
tree, could not be sustained and that the alleged discrepancies and contradictions in their evidence
were not such as to detract from truthfulness. we have also gone through the evidence of goga and
chandra and we entirely agree with the observations of the learned judges of the high court that
their evidence was natural and consistent and that the alleged discrepancies pointed out by the ses-
sions judge were not either contradictions at all or, even if they were so, they were so trivial as to
affect in any way their veracity. the learned judges further pointed out that the evidence of goga
and chandra was supported by the evidence of doongar singh (p. w. 21), a police constable, who
gave the first information report at the earliest point of time. the recitals in the first information
report corroborate his evidence. the learned judges then indicated that this version was practically
supported by other eve- witnesses and that they did not see any reason why it should have been
invented, if it was not true. having regard to the said evidence, they found themselves entirely
unable to accept the conclusion of the learned trial judge that this was a case where a stray beating
was given by some individuals on the side of the rajputs to some individuals on the bide of the jats.
they found that the rajputs were members of an unlawful assembly and that they were all animated
by a common object of beating the cultivators. having held that the learned sessions judge was
clearly wrong on the question of unlawful assembly, the learned judges proceeded to consider the
case of each accused. they adopted the following principle, based upon the decision of this court in
abdul gani v. state of m. p. (1):
"we quite recognise that in a case of rioting where two inimical factions are involved,
exaggerations are bound to be made, and some innocent persons are likely to be
falsely implicated; but all the same, it is the duty of the courts not to throw out the
whole case by following the easy method of (1) a.i.r. 1954 s.c. 31.
relying on discrepancies, and, where the case for the prosecution is substantially true,
to find out if any of the accused participated, in the offence, and if their presence is
established beyond all reasonable doubt, punish them for the offences committed by
them."
they found, on the evidence, that appellant 1, sanwat singh, who was present on the spot was a
member of the unlawful assembly and had actually struck sheonath with his sword as a result of
which his three fingers were cut; that appellant 2, dhan singh, was one of the persons who took a
leading part in the beating; that appellant 3, mangej singh, was undoubtedly one of the participants
in the unlawful assembly; that appellant 4, kalu singh, was armed with a sword and attacked the
jats and that his version that he had been first attacked by the jats was not true; that appellant 5,
narain singh, was one of the members of the unlawful assembly and that he had given beatings to
p.w. 25; that appellant 6, gulab singh, struck sheokaran jat with lathies; and that appellant 7,
sabal singh, appellant 8, baney singh, and appellant 9, inder singh, who admitted their presence atsanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40914/ 10the spot but stated that they were attacked by the jats, were clearly participators in the beating. as
regards the other accused, the learned judges, having examined the entire evidence, agreed with the
sessions judge in holding that no case had been made out against those accused beyond all
reasonable doubt. so far as these accused are concerned there is no evidence to show that any of
them had a weapon or that they had taken any active part in assaulting one or other of the jats. in
the result, the learned judges of the high court found that the appellants formed an unlawful
assembly to beat the jats and that they must have known that murders were likely to be committed
in prosecution of that common object. on that finding, they convicted and senten- ced the
appellants as stated earlier in the judgment. now, can it be said that, as learned counsel for the
appellants argues, the judges of the high court had ignored any of the principles laid down by the
privy council and subsequently accepted by this court? we think not.
the foregoing analysis of the findings of the two courts discloses the following facts: the sessions
judge, on the general case of the prosecution that the rajputs, chagrined by the attitude of the jats
in occupying their usual place in the temple, went to the banyan tree, conferred for a short time and
came back to the temple to attack the jats, rejected the evidence of the main witnesses for the
prosecution, namely, goga, chandra and doongar singh, on grounds which do not stand a
moment's scrutiny and ignored the voluminous evidence, which corroborated the evidence of the
said three witnesses, without giving valid or acceptable reasons for the same. the learned sessions
judge did not even give a definite finding on this version of the prosecution case, though impliedly
he must be deemed to have rejected it. in regard to the individual cases he divided the witnesses into
three categories, and, applying mechanical tests, refused to act upon their evidence. the high court
rightly pointed out that there was no reason why the voluminous evidence in support of the general
case and why the evidence of the three witnesses, goga, chandra and doongar singh, should be
rejected. the learned judges of the high court accepted their evidence, which conclusively
established that the general case was true and that the appellants actually took active part in
attacking the jats with swords and lathies. in doing so, the learned judges did not depart from any
of the principles laid down by the privy council. indeed, they interfered with the judgment of the
sessions judge, as they came to the conclusion that, the said judgment, in so far as the appellants
were concerned, was clearly wrong and contrary to the overwhelming and reliable evidence adduced
in the case. the learned judges of the high court, in our opinion, approached the case from a
correct perspective and gave definite findings on a consideration of the entire evidence.
the question now is, whether the appellants have made out any case for interference with the
judgment of the high court under art. 136 of the constitution.
article 136 of the constitution confers a wide discretionary power on this court to entertain appeals
in suitable cases not otherwise provided for by the constitution. it is implicit in the reserve power
that it cannot be exhaustively defined, but decided cases-, do not permit interference unless "by
disregard to the forms of legal process or some violation of the principles of natural justice or
otherwise, substantial and grave injustice has been done". though art. 136 is couched in widest
terms, the practice of this court is not to interfere on questions of fact except in excep- tional cases
when the finding is such that it shocks the conscience of the court. in the present case, the high
court has not contravened any of the principles laid down in sheo swarup's case (1) and has alsosanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40914/ 11given reasons which led it to hold that the acquittal was not justified. in the circumstances, no case
has been made out for our not accepting the said findings.
in the result, the appeal fails and is dismissed. appeal dismissed.sanwat singh & others vs state of rajasthan on 9 december, 1960
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40914/ 12