supreme court of india
commissioner of income-tax, west ... vs east coast commercial co. ltd on 11 october, 1966
equivalent citations: 1967 air 768, 1967 scr (1) 821
author: s c.
bench: shah, j.c.
           petitioner:
commissioner of income-tax, west bengal
        vs.
respondent:
east coast commercial co.  ltd.
date of judgment:
11/10/1966
bench:
shah, j.c.
bench:
shah, j.c.
ramaswami, v.
bhargava, vishishtha
citation:
 1967 air  768            1967 scr  (1) 821
 citator info :
 r          1976 sc1141  (14)
act:
income  tax  act  (11 of 1922), s.  23-a--company  in  which
public are not substantially interested-test for.
taxation  of  income (investigation  commission)  act,  1947
declared ultra vires-admissions recorded by authority acting
under act-admisibility in evidence.
headnote:
members  of a family held 4,015 shares, out of 4,391  shares
in  the  respondent  company, which  was  a  public  limited
company.  in the course of investigation under the  taxation
of income (investigation commission) act, 1947, the heads of
the various branches of the family admitted that the  shares
were  purchased by them out of their joint income which  had
not  been disclosed and that a majority of the  shares  were
held  benami.  an offer of settlement was also made  that  a
single  assessment may be made in respect of  the  "secreted
income" treating them as an association of persons and  that
every  member  of  the  family be  treated  as  jointly  and
severally  liable  to  pay  tax on  that  income.   for  the
assessment years 1950-51 and 1951-52, the income-tax officercommissioner of income-tax, west ... vs east coast commercial co. ltd on 11 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1697399/ 1commenced  proceedings under s. 23a of the  income-tax  act,
1922, and held that the company was one in which the  public
were not substantially interested and that its affairs  were
under  the control of the members of the family.  he  passed
an order under the section that the undistributed portion of
the assessable income of the company as computed for income-
tax  purposes  and reduced by the amount of  income-tax  and
super-tax  shall  be  deeming to have  been  distributed  as
dividends among the share-holders.  the order was  confirmed
by  the  appellate assistant commissioner.   the  income-tax
appellate  tribunal reversed the order.  the  tribunal  held
that  the  offers made by the members of the family  to  the
income-tax  investigation  commission were not  relevant  in
determining whether the company was one in which the  public
were  not substantially interested, and that from  the  fact
that  the members of the family held 4,015 shares, it  could
not  be inferred that the shares were jointly  acquired,  or
that  the members exercised control over the affairs of  the
company.   the  tribunal  also observed that  there  was  no
material  placed by the department to show that the  members
of  the  family actually controlled the voting or  acted  in
concert  so  as  to bring the company within  s.  23a.   the
tribunal, therefore, held that the section did not apply  to
the  company since it was not established that  the  company
was   one  in  which  the  public  were  not   substantially
interested, even though the members of the family held  more
than  75%  of  the  shares issued  by  the  company.   on  a
reference,  the  high  court  confirmed  the  order  of  the
tribunal  holding that even on the finding that the  members
of  the family were in a position to control the affairs  of
the  company, there was no evidence of any  overact  showing
that  they were acting in concert and thereby constituted  a
block.
in appeal to this court,
held : the approach to the problem by the tribunal and  high
court was erroneous.  it was for the tribunal to  determine,
having regard to ordinary human experience whether it may be
safely taken that the members of the family must have  acted
together as a controlling block.  that
822
enquiry  had not been made and the case was decided  on  the
application of an erroneous test. [830 c-d]
(i)  in  deciding whether an order under s. 23a (as  oh  the
relevant  date)  is called for, it must be  decided  in  the
first instance whether there was a of persons     acting  in
concert  holding a sufficient number of shares  may  control
the  voting as a block.  it is sufficient, if having  regard
to their relationship, their conduct, their common  interest
etc. it may be inferred that they must be acting together  :
evidence  of actual concerted acting is  normally  difficult
-to  obtain and is not insisted upon.  it is the holding  in
the  aggregate,  of a majority of the shares  issued,  by  a
person  or  persons  acting in concert in  relation  to  thecommissioner of income-tax, west ... vs east coast commercial co. ltd on 11 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1697399/ 2affairs of the company which establishes the existence of  a
block,  and  if the block holds 75% of the voting  power  it
shall be deemed that the company is one in which the  public
are  not  substantially  interested.  to  establish  that  a
company  is  one in which the public are  not  substantially
interested,,  it is not a condition that actual exercise  of
control by a group must be established. [828 b, e-f; 829  f-
h]
(ii) the  fact  that certain provisions of the  taxation  of
income (investigation commission) act were held to be  ultra
vires  did not render the commission an unlawful  body,  and
the  admissions  recorded  by the commission  could  not  be
ignored.  the report could be taken in evidence after giving
an opportunity to the respondent to make its  representation
against the report and to tender evidence against the  truth
of the recitals contained therein. [830 b-d]
raghuvanshi mills ltd. v. commissioner of income-tax, [1961]
2  s.c.r.  978  and commissioner of  income-tax  v.  jubilee
mills, [1963] supp. 1 s. c. r. 83, followed.
judgment:
civil appellate jurisdiction : civil appeals nos. 672 & 673 of 1965.
appeals from the judgment and order dated august 17, 1962 of the calcutta high court in
income-tax reference no. 32 of 1959;
s. t. desai r. ganapathy iyer and r. n. sachthey, for the appellant (in both the appeals).
a. k. sen and d. n. mukherjee, for the respondent (in both the appeals).
the judgment of the court was delivered by shah, j. m/s east coast commerical company ltd.
hereinafter called 'the company'-disclosed in its return for the assess- ment years 1950-51 and
1951-52, a consolidated net profit of rs. 8,89,241/- for the account period april 7, 1949 to july 16,
1950. the income-tax officer computed the income of the company for the assessment year 1950-51
at rs. 7,27,824/- and for the assessment year 1951-52 at rs. 2,00,803/-. it came to the notice of the
income-tax officer that the company was one in which the public were not substantially interested
within the meaning of s. 23a of the income-tax act, 1922, and that the distributable profit after
deducting tax due on the total income was rs. 4,32,151/- for the assessment year 1950-51, and rs.
1,13,579/- for the assessment year 1951-52, and that the company had distributed rs. 43,910/- only
as dividend. the income-tax officer commenced proceedings under  s. 23a of the income-tax act,
1922, and passed an order that the undistributed portion of the assessable income of the company
as computed for income-tax purposes and reduced by the amount of income-tax and super-tax shall
be deemed to have been distributed as dividends among the shareholders. the order was confirmed
by the appellate assistant commissioner. but the income-tax appellate tribunal reversed the order.
the tribunal held that s. 23a did not apply to the company since it was not established that thecommissioner of income-tax, west ... vs east coast commercial co. ltd on 11 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1697399/ 3company was one in which the public were not substantially interested.
at the instance of the commissioner of income-tax, three questions were referred to the high court
of judicature at calcutta. in these appeals the first question alone is material :
"whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case the tribunal erred in law
in holding that the assessee-company was one in which the public are substantially
interested within the meaning of s. 23a of the indian income-tax act ?"
the high court answered that question in the negative. the commissioner of income-tax has, with
certificate under  s. 66a(2) of the income-tax act, 1922, appealed to this court. relationship
between the members of the family jointly re- ferred to as 'the kedias' is explained by the following
genealogy jhabarmull kedia (died in 1937)
---------------------------------------------------------------
:                      :               :            :
nagarmull         probladrai        madangpal     bnarashi.
(died in 1928)    (died on 16-6-51)                prosad
------------------------
:                      :
mahabir prosad         purarumal
the joint status between the members of the family was severed on july 4, 1943, and the members
of the family formed themselves into a partnership and carried on the family business. some time
thereafter benarashi prosad and puranmall retired from the partnership and started an
independent business with an outsider in partnership. this business was taken over by a private
company styled 'east coast commercial company ltd. later the private company was converted
into a public limited company bearing the same name and having a paid-up capital of rs. 4,39,
100/divided into 4,391 shares of rs. 100/- each.
investigation was started against the members of the kedia family under the taxation of income
(investigation commission) act, 1947. in the course of the investigation the heads of the four
branches of the kedia family admitted that the shares in the respondent company numbering 4,115
were purchased by them out of their joint income which had not been disclosed and a majority of
the shares in the company was held benami. an offer of settlement was then made by the members
of the kedia family before the investigation commission. in paragraph-26 of the report, the
commission observed as follows "these figures have been accepted by madangopal kedia for
himself and as manager of the joint hindu family consisting of himself and his minor sons, prosad
kedia for himself and as manager of family consisting of himself and his minor son as the executor
and legal representative of his elder brother prohladrai, puranmal kedia, and prosad kedia for
himself and as manager of family consisting of himself and his son, and they have jointly filed a
settlement application. though these persons are now divided and separate assessments to
income-tax are being made on each, they have admitted that so far as the secret profits in question
were concer- ned, they were earned by all the members jointly and have, therefore, requested that acommissioner of income-tax, west ... vs east coast commercial co. ltd on 11 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1697399/ 4single assessment may be made, treating them as an association of persons and making each
member and his joint family jointly -and severally liable for the tax."
it appears that 2,000 shares of the company were standing in the name of durgadutt
jhunjhunwalla who had declared himself to be the sole proprietor of the business styled 'mohanlal
murarilal' carried on in the state of hyderabad. it was found in the course of the investigation
before the investigation commission that the shares were held by durgadutt jhunjhunwalla benami
for the members of the kedla family. by letter dated december 18, 1951 it was admitted by them that
durgadutt jhunjhunwalla was only a " working partner" having a tenth share and that the entire
capital of the firm- had been advanced by the kedias jointly. out of the 2,000 shares -registered in
the name of mohanlal murarilal, 1,000 ,shares were then transferred to the executor of the estate of
prohladrai kedia and the balance was taken over by durgadutt jhunjhunwalla on january 30, 1951,
when his account was finally settled, his personal account being credited with the sum of rs.
1,00,000/- representing his remuneration for services rendered till october 20, 1949 and he being
debited with that sum representing the value of 1,000 shares made over to him. therefore upto the
account year 1951-52 in the 1,000 shares held in the name of durgadutt jhunjhunwalla the
members of the kedia family had a 9/10th share.
by september 17, 1952 the members of the kedia family got all the shares transferred to their own
names from the benamidars. the share-holding of the various, members of the family thereafter was
as follows
1. madangopal kedia 120 shares
2. benarshi prosad kedia 495 shares
3. prohladrai kedia 1,389 shares
4. purnamal kedia 650 shares
5. mahabir prosad kedia 461 shares (out of 1,389 shares held in the name of prohaldrai kedia,
1,000 shares were those which were transferred by durgadutt jhunjhunwalla).
taking into account 900 shares-being 9/10th share of the holding of 1,000 shares which were
transferred on january 30, 1951 in the name of durgadutt jhunjhunwalla, the total holding of the
members of the kedia family in the company therefore stood at 4,015 shares. this holding was in
excess of seventy-five per cent of the total number of the shares issued by the company.
the income-tax officer held that madangopal kedia and others formed an association of persons. in
his view 4,115 shares had been purchased benami out of the income earned jointly by the members
of the family and that the income was invested by them as an association of persons, and that there
was no evidence that the income from those shares was taken individually by the members of the
family, who even after disruption of the joint family on july 4, 1943, had continued to work together
and make their investments as an association of persons. the income-tax officer further held thatcommissioner of income-tax, west ... vs east coast commercial co. ltd on 11 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1697399/ 5since the shares were never quoted in the market and the affairs of the company were under the
control of the members of the kedia family, an order under s. 23a of the income-tax act could
appropriately be made. in appeal, the appellate assistant commissioner agreed with the income-tax
officer and held that the shares were acquired jointly by the members of the family out of their
"joint secreted earnings". the appellate assistant commissioner also proceeded to and lyse the
minutes of the meetings of the company showing the attendance at the meetings of the company
held between april 10, 1946 and december 30, 1951 and held that the members of the kedia family
had controlled the affairs of the company and on their admissions they had formed an association
for acquisition of the shares of the company, and for various sup.c.i./66-8 other purposes, and
therefore it could be inferred that the members of the association who controlled more than seventy
five per cent of the total shares and the voting power had acted in concert.
but the income-tax appellate tribunal held that the offers made by the members of the kedia family
to the income-tax investigation commission that a single assessment be made in respect of their
"secreted income" treating them as an association of persons and that every member of the family be
treated as jointly and severally liable to pay tax on that income were not relevant in determining
whether the company was one in which the public were not substantially interested, and that from
the fact that the members of the kedia family held 4,015 shares, it could not be inferred that the
shares were jointly acquired, or that the members of. the family exercised control over the affairs of
the company. the tribunal observed :
"....that unless and until the department clearly established by proper material that
the kedias were acting in concert there is absolutely no case for holding that the
provisions of section 23a become applicable to the facts of the case as in this case we
have held that there is nothing to indicate that the separated members of the kedia
family acted in concert we hold that no case has been made out by the department
for holding that the assessee-company is one in which the public were not
substantially interested."
the high court expressed a doubt that the report made by the income-tax investigation
commission "may not be evidence of anything contained therein", and proceeded to observe :
"there is no doubt upon the facts stated above, that the five kedias who held between
them 3,115 shares, and also had an interest in the 1,000 shares of messrs. mohanlal
murarilal, were in a position to control the affairs of the company. . . . in my opinion,
tribunal came to right conclusion. it may be that the holders of the shares are in a
position to control the company. the majority of shareholders may be directors or
relatives of directors or relatives of shareholders. but, that is not by itself sufficient to
satisfy the test. there must not only be evidence to show that a number of individuals
are in a position to control the company, but it must be shown that they are in fact
acting in concert and they have constituted a 'block' so as to control the affairs of the
company by themselves. this requires some overt act. . . . there is not a single fact to
show that the kedias or their nominees were in fact acting in concert or operating as
a 'block'. the tribunal was right in coming to the conclusion that no materials werecommissioner of income-tax, west ... vs east coast commercial co. ltd on 11 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1697399/ 6placed before it by the department to establish the fact that the kedias in question
acted in concert or operated as a block, so as to bring the assessee company within
the provision of section 23a. "
by  s. 23a(1) of the income-tax act as it stood in the relevant years the income-tax officer was
required, if satisfied that in respect of any previous year the profits and gains distributed as
dividends by any company were less than sixty per cent. of the assessable income of the company of
that previous year, as reduced by the amount of income- tax and super-tax payable by the company
in respect thereof, to make an order that the undistributed portion of the assessable income of the
company of that previous year shall be deemed to have been distributed as dividends among the
shareholders as at the date of the general meeting. but - this power could not be exercised in respect
of any company in which the public are substantially interested. by the. explanation to s, 23a(1) it
was enacted that "a company shall be deemed to be a company in which the public are substantially
interested if shares of the company .... carrying not less than twenty-five per cent. of the voting
power have been allotted unconditionally to, or acquired un- conditionally by, and are at the end of
the previous year beneficially held by, the public .... and if any such shares have in the course of such
previous year been the subject of dealings in any stock exchange .... or are in fact freely transferable
by the holders to other members of the public." this court in raghuvanshi mills ltd. v.
commissioner of income-tax(1) examined the scheme of s. 23a as it stood before the finance act of
1955 and observed :
"the word 'public' is used (in the explanation) in contradistinction to one or more
persons who act in unison and among whom the voting power constitutes a block. if
such a block exists and possesses more than seventy-five per cent. of the voting
power, then the company cannot be said to be one in which the public are
substantially interested. . . .
the test is first to find out whether there is an individual or group which controls the
voting power as a block. if there be such a block, the shares held by it cannot be said
to be 'unconditionally' and 'beneficially' held by members of the public."
it is clear that in deciding whether an order under  s. 23a(1) is called for, the income-tax officer
must determine--(1) whether there is an individual or a group which can control the voting power as
(1) [1961] 2s.c.r. 978-41 i.t,r. 613.
a block. the existence of such a block may be established by showing that the voting power is vested
in persons possessing more than fifty per cent. of the shares issued who act in concert ; and (ii) that
the block exercises a controlling interest over the affairs of the company. this condition is satisfied
only if the voting power of the block or group is seventy-five per cent or more. if the block holds
seventy-five per cent of the voting power it shall be deemed that the company is one in which the
public are not substantially interested. on the other hand, if the members of the public hold shares
of the company (not being shares entitled to a fixed rate of dividend, whether with or without a
further right to participate in profits) carrying not less than twenty five per cent of the voting power
allotted unconditionally to, or acquired unconditionally by them, the company shall be deemed tocommissioner of income-tax, west ... vs east coast commercial co. ltd on 11 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1697399/ 7be one in which the public are substantially interested.
it is unfortunate that the tribunal did not record a finding whether there was a group of persons
controlling the affairs of the company. in the view of the tribunal, since the acquisition of 4,015
shares of the company was not joint and there was no other evidence that the members of the kedia
family were in fact acting in concert, the company could not be deemed one in which the public
were not substantially interested. the high court also made a similar approach. they were of the
view that even on the finding that the members of the kedia family were in a position to control the
affairs of the company, there was no evidence of any overt act showing that they were acting in
concert and thereby constituted a block.
in our judgment, that approach to the problem was erroneous. the tribunal had to decide in the
first instance whether there was a group of persons acting in concert holding a sufficient number of
shares which may control the voting as a block. but the existence of a block is not decisive. if there
be a group of persons holding control over voting, the company would still be a company in which
the public are substantially interested, if twenty-five per cent. or more of the voting power has been,
allotted unconditionally to and beneficially held by the public and the shares were in the previous
years subject of dealings in any stock exchange in the taxable territories or were in fact freely
transferable by the holders to other members of the public. the two enquiries are distinct. the
tribunal in paragraph 9 of its order observed that there was no material placed by the department
to show that the kedias in question acted in concert so as to bring the assessee company within s.
23a. if thereby the tribunal meant that there was no evidence to prove that the members of the
kedia family "actually acted in concert," the view taken by the tribunal was, in our judgment,
wrong, since to establish that a company is one in which the public are not substantially interested,
it is not a condition that actual exercise of control by a group must be established. the high court
was apparently of the view that the members of the kedia family were in a position to control the
affairs of the company, but there was no evidence of any overt act or concert between them. but in
commissioner of income-tax, bombay city-, v. jubilee mills ltd. (1) this court held that no direct
evidence of overt act or concert between the members of the group having control over voting was
necessary to prove that the company was not one in which the public were substantially interested.
it was observed in raghuvanshi mills' case(2) that "in deciding if there is such a controlling interest,
there is no formula applicable to all cases. relationship and position as director are not by
themselves decisive. if relatives act, not freely, but with others, they cannot be said to belong to that
body, which is described as 'public' in the explanation." in jubilee mills' case(1) this court
elaborated those observations and stated :
"the test is not whether they have actually acted in concert but whether the
circumstances are such that human experience tells us that it can safely be taken that
they must be acting together. it is not necessary to state the kind of evidence that will
prove such concerted acting. each case must necessarily be decided on its own facts."
on an analysis of the reasons recorded by the tribunal and the high court, it is clear that the
tribunal held that the kedias did not form a controlling group because there was no evidence that
they actually controlled the voting, even though they held more than seventy-five per cent of thecommissioner of income-tax, west ... vs east coast commercial co. ltd on 11 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1697399/ 8shares issued by the company : the high court observed that the members of the kedia family held
4,015 shares of the company and were in a position to control the affairs of the company, but there
was no evidence to show that they did in fact act in concert and controlled the affairs of the
company as a block. but, as already observed, if the members of the kedia family formed a block
and held more than seventy-five per cent of the voting power,it was not necessary to prove that they
actually exercised controlling interest. it is the holding in the aggregate of a majority of the shares
issued by a person or persons acting in concert in relation to the affairs of the company which
establishes the existence of a block. it is sufficient, if having regard to their relation etc., their
conduct, and their common interest, that it may be inferred that they must be acting together :
evidence of actual concerted acting is normally difficult to obtain, and is not insisted upon.
(1) [1963] supp. 1 s.c.r. 83-48 i.t.r. 9. (2) [1961] 2 s.c.r. 978 we may observe that the high court
appears to have felt some doubt as to the admissibility of the report of the income- tax investigation
commission. but the income-tax authorities are not strictly bound by the rules of evidence, and the
mere fact that certain provisions of the taxation of income (investigation commission) act relating
to the inquiries to be held were declared to be ultra vires by this court did not render the
commission an unlawful body ; and in any event the admissions which are recorded by the
commission, as having been made before them, cannot be ignored. the report had evidence value
and could be taken into account. undoubtedly the report had to be brought to the notice of the
company, and the company had to be given an opportunity to make its representation against the
report and to tender evidence against the truth of the recitals contained therein. it is not suggested
that this opportunity was not given. it was for the tribunal to determine, having regard to ordinary
human experience whether it may be safely taken that the members of the kedia family must have
acted together as a controlling block. that enquiry has not been made, and the case has been
decided on the application of a test which is erroneous. we are, therefore, unable on the statement
of case to answer the question referred.
we accordingly set aside the order passed by the high court and direct that the tribunal do submit
a supplementary statement of the case under s. 66(4) of the income-tax act, 1922, because in our
view the statement of the case already referred to is not sufficient to enable determination of the
case raised thereby. the tribunal may make such additions or alterations in the statement of the
case in the light of the observations made in the course of this judgment. the tribunal will submit
the supplementary statement of the case to the high court. the high court will then proceed to
determine the question according to law. the costs of this hearing will be costs in the proceedings
before the high court.
order of high court set aside with direction, to, the tribunal to submit supplementary statement of
the case. v.p.s.commissioner of income-tax, west ... vs east coast commercial co. ltd on 11 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1697399/ 9