supreme court of india
bhiva doulu patil vs state of maharashtra on 29 august, 1962
equivalent citations: 1963 air 599, 1962 scr supl. (3) 59
author: k l.
bench: kapur, j.l.
           petitioner:
bhiva doulu patil
        vs.
respondent:
state of maharashtra
date of judgment:
29/08/1962
bench:
kapur, j.l.
bench:
kapur, j.l.
sarkar, a.k.
hidayatullah, m.
citation:
 1963 air  599            1962 scr  supl. (3)  59
 citator info :
 r          1970 sc  45  (21)
 rf         1988 sc 672  (7)
 rf         1991 sc1463  (5)
act:
criminal  trial-approver-  corroboration, if  necessary  qua
each  accused-indian  evidence  act , 1872(1  of  1872),  ss.
114,133.
headnote:
the  appellant  and  r  were convicted  for  murder  on  the
testimony of an approver corroborated by the recovery at the
instance  of  r  of  the knife with  which  the  murder  was
committed  and of the evidence that the appellant and r  had
got  the knife prepared nine weeks before the  murder.   the
appellant contended that his conviction was illegal as there
was no corroboration of the testimony of the approver so far
as he was concerned.
held,   that  the  conviction  of  the  appellant  was   not
sustainable.    the  law  required  that  there  should   be
corroboration  of the approver in material  particulars  and
qua  each accused.  the combined effect of ss. 133  and  114
illustration (b) is that though the conviction of an accusedbhiva doulu patil vs state of maharashtra on 29 august, 1962
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1950190/ 1on  the testimony of an accomplice could not be said  to  be
illegal,  the courts will not accept such  evidence  without
corroboration in
831
material  particulars.   in the present case  there  was  no
corroboration  of  the  testimony of the  approver  qua  the
appellant.   the preparation of the knife nine weeks  before
the  occurrence  was  no corroboration of  the  approver  as
within that time gap the appellant might have recanted;  nor
was  the  discovery  of  the knife  at  the  instance  of  r
sufficient  to connect the appellant with the  murder.   the
fact that the approver had made a confessional statement  to
his  brother  could  not  be  called  corroboration  of  the
approver.   it was not sufficient for the conviction of  the
appellant  that  there  was  evidence  to  corroborate   the
participation of r in the murder.
res. v. boyes,(1861)9 cox, crim. cas.32, bhuboni sahu v. the
king,  (1949)  l.  r. 76 1. a. 147 and  r.  v.  baskerville,
(1916) 2 k. b. 658, referred to.
judgment:
criminal appellate jurisdiction: criminal appeal no. 174 of 1961.
appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated april 12113, 1961, of the bombay high
court in cr. a. no. 308 of 1961.
g. c. mathur, for the appellant.
s. b. jathar and r. n. sachthey, for the respondents. 1962. august 29. the judgment of the court
was delivered by kapup., j.-this is an appeal against the judgment and order of the high court of
bombay confirming the conviction of the appellant for an offence under s. 302, indian penal code,
read with s. 34 for the murder of one lahu vithu patil on the night between may 23, and 24, 1960 at
village pasarde. four persons rama krishna patil accused no. 1, bhiva doulu patil accused no. 2
(now appellant before us), lahu santu patil accused no. 3 and deoba approver p.w.5 are alleged to
have taken part in murder of lahu vithu patil. rama krishna patil accused no.1 was convicted of
murder and sentenced to death but on appeal his sentence was reduced to one of imprisonment for
life. the appellant was convicted as above stated and sentenced to imprisonment for life. the third
accused lahu santu patil was acquitted and the 4th participant deoba turned approver and is
p.w.5. the case for the prosecution was that the appellant had a suspicion that the deceased bad a
liaison with his wife. he, the appellant, approached the approver and suggested that the deceased
should be killed. this was on march 16, 1960. on march 17, 1960, rama krishna patil accused no. 1
and appellant got a knife prepared by nanu santu sutar p.w.7 from a crowbar. the deceased was a
wrestler and he and his brother used to sleep in the fields and they also had dogs and for that reason
the murder could not be committed for sometime. when rains set in, the deceased started sleeping
at patil's talim (gymnasium). there, on the night of the murder the deceased was killed with thebhiva doulu patil vs state of maharashtra on 29 august, 1962
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1950190/ 2knife which was used by rama krishna patil accused no.1. at that time the appellant had a torch
and two others lahu santu patil and deoba were unarmed. two blows ware given by accused no.1
one on the throat and the second one on the left side of the chest. at the place of the occurrence the
assailants left a towel and a patka(turban). both these articles have been found to belong to accused
no. 1 rama krishna patil. hearing the noise and growing of the deceased, lahu vithu patil, other
persons who were sleeping were awakened and one of them went and informed the brother of the
deceased and then the first information report was made to the police but no names were mentioned
therein. on june 6, 1960, deoba was arrested on information received by police sub-inspector
nandke. on june 25, 1960, as a result of a statement made by accused no.1 the knife which is
alleged to have been used for the murder was recovered. this knife is stated to be stained with blood
but it has not been proved to be human blood. it may be stated that the knife was of rather
unusually large dimensions the two injuries on the deceased were very extensive and according to
the medical evidence they could have been caused with the knife which was recovered. the question
that arises in the present case is whether the statement of the approver has been corroborated in
material particulars and qua the appellant.the trial court convicted the appellant on the testimony
of the approver and found corroboration for the approver's testimony in the statement of nanu
sintu sutar, p.w. 7 who had prepared the knife alleged to have be, been used for the offence on
march 17, 1960, and hi,; motive to commit the murder because of the suspicion he had about his
wife having a liaison with the deceased. these facts according to the learned judge were sufficient to
convict the appellant.. the high court on appeal found corroboration in material particulars; from
the evidence of santu 1-.w. 6 brother of deoba to whom deoba had made a confession of his
participation in the offence the discovery of the 'knife at the instance of accused no. 1 and the knife
being found blood-stained and the unusual character of the knife which fitted in with the
dimensions of the injurious caused to the deceased. from those facts the learned judges came to the
conclusion that the approver deoba was giving a true version of the occurrence. with great respect
to the high court we are unable to agree because without corroboration of the approver qua the
appellant the conviction is unsustainable, the law being that there should be corroboration of the
approver in material particulars and qua each accused.
the statement of santu, brother of the approver is no corroboration of the approver. it only means
that approver made a confessional statement to his brother. that cannot be called, in the
circumstances of this case, to be a corroboration of the approver. the evidence of nanu santu sutar
p.w. 7 also cannot operate as a corroboration of the approver's story because the knife was got
prepared by accused no. 1 and the appellant nine weeks before the murder and that fact by itself will
not corroborate the charge under  s. 302 read with s. 34 of the indian penal code against the
appellant. the time gap between the preparation of the knife and murder is great and it is possible
in such circumstances that the appellant might have cemented and not proceeded with the
commission of the offence. the finding of the knife at the instance of the first accused also is no
corroboration of the approver's story which would be sufficient to connect the appellant with the
murder, under  s. 34 of the indian penal code. it may be that in this case the approver's evidence
was sufficiently corroborated for the conviction of the first accused upon which we express no
opinion but so far as the appellant is concerned we find that there is no corroboration of the
approver's story and it is not-sufficient that there is evidence to corroborate the participation of the
first accused in the murder. it is also necessary for there being independent corroboration of thebhiva doulu patil vs state of maharashtra on 29 august, 1962
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1950190/ 3participation of the appellant in the offence with which he has been charged. in these circumstances
the conviction of the appellant is not sustainable.
in coming to the above conclusion we have not been unmindful of the provisions of s. 133 of the
evidence act which reads- :-
s. 133 "an accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person;
and a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated
testimony of an accomplice".
it cannot be doubted that under that section a conviction based merely on the
uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice may not be illegal, the courts
nevertheless cannot lose sight of the rule of prudence and practice which in the words
of martin b in res. v. boyes (1) (has become so hallowed as to be deserving of
respect" and in the words of lord abinger "it deserves to have all the reverence of the
law". this rule of guidance is to be found in illustration (b) to s. 114 of the evidence
which is as follows :-
"the court may presume that an accomplice is unworthy of credit unless he is
corroborated in material particulars".
both sections are part of one subject and have to be considered together. the privy
council in bhuboni sahu v. the king (2) when its attention was drawn to the
judgment of madras high court in re rajagopal(3) where conviction was based upon
the evidence of an accomplice supported by the statement of a co-accused, said as
follows :-
"their lordships................... would nevertheless observe that courts should be slow
to depart from the rule of prudence, based on long experience, which requires some
independent evidence, implicating the particular accused. the danger of acting upon
accomplice evidence is not merely that the accomplice is on his own admission a man
of bad character who took part in the offence and afterwards to save himself betrayed
his former associates, and who has placed himself in a (1) (1861) 9 cox, crim. cas. 32.
(2) (1949) l.r. 76. i.a. 147, (3) i.l.r. 1944. mad. 308.
position in which he can hardly fail to have a strong bias in favour of the prosecution ;
the real danger is that he is telling a story which in its general outline is true, and it is
easy for him to work into the story matter which is untrue".
the combined effect of  ss. 133 and 114, illustration (b) may be stated as follows :
according to the former, which is a rule of law, an accomplice is competent to give
evidence and according to the latter which is a rule of practice it is almost alwaysbhiva doulu patil vs state of maharashtra on 29 august, 1962
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1950190/ 4unsafe to convict upon his testimony alone. therefore though the conviction of an
accused on the testimony of an accomplice cannot be said to be illegal yet the courts
will, as a matter of practice, not accept the evidence of such a witness without
corroboration in material particulars. the law may be stated in the words of lord
reading c. j. in r. v. baskerville (1) as follows "there is do doubt that the
uncorroborated evidence of an accomplice is admissible in law (r. v attwood, 1787, 1
leach 464). but it has been ion(,, a rule of practice at common law for the judge to
warn the jury of the danger of convicting a prisoner on the uncorroborated testimony
of an accomplice, and in the discre- tion of the judge, to advise them not to convict
upon such evidence, but the judge should point out to the jury that it is within their
legal province to convict upon such unconfirmed evidence (r. v stubbs, dears 555 in
re heunier, 1894 2 q.b. 415)".
we, therefore, allow this appeal, set aside the order of conviction and direct that the appellant be
released forthwith.
appeal allowed (1) [1916] 2. k.b.658.bhiva doulu patil vs state of maharashtra on 29 august, 1962
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1950190/ 5