supreme court of india
state of madras vs madurai mills co., ltd on 4 october, 1966
equivalent citations: 1967 air 681, 1967 scr (1) 732
author: v ramaswami
bench: ramaswami, v.
           petitioner:
state of madras
        vs.
respondent:
madurai mills co., ltd.
date of judgment:
04/10/1966
bench:
ramaswami, v.
bench:
ramaswami, v.
shah, j.c.
bhargava, vishishtha
citation:
 1967 air  681            1967 scr  (1) 732
 citator info :
 rf         1974 sc1380  (31)
act:
madras  general-  sales-tax  act  (9  of  1939),  s.   12(4)
(b)--order  of  assessing authority-when merges in  that  of
appellate  or  revisional  authority-period  of  limitation-
starting point.
headnote:
for  the assessment year 1950-51 the respondent submitted  a
return  of  its net turnover to the  deputy  commercial  tax
officer  who was the assessing authority.  as he  determined
the net turnover at a higher amount the respondent  appealed
to  the commercial tax officer, who allowed the appeal  with
respect  to one item.  on 28th november 1952, the  assessing
authority issued a revised assessment order as per the order
of  the commercial tax officer.  on 27th december 1952,  the
respondent  presented a revision petition before the  deputy
commissioner of commercial taxes raising the only objection,
as a new -contention, that it should not have been  assessed
to  tax on amounts collected by it by way of tax.   on  21st
august 1954, the deputy commissioner dismissed the  petition
on the ground that the respondent was not entitled to  raisestate of madras vs madurai mills co., ltd on 4 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28118/ 1a  new contention for the first time.  on 4th  august  1958.
the  board  of  revenue issued a notice  to  the  respondent
stating  that  it  proposed  to  revise  the  assessment  by
including  in the net turnover a sum representing the  value
of cotton purchased by the respondent from outside the state
and  which was excluded by the assessing  authority.   after
considering the respondent's objections the board fixed  the
net   taxable  turnover  by  including  that  amount.    the
respondent's appeal to the high court was allowed.
in appeal by the state,
held  :  the  order of the board  of  revenue  was  invalid,
because, under s. 12(4) (b) of the madras general  sales-tax
act, 1939, the board of revenue could invoke its  revisional
jurisdiction.only  within four years from the date on  which
the order of the assessing authority was communicated to the
assessee. [734 g; 736 b-c]
(i)the  subject-matter of the revision proceedings  before
the  board of revenue was only the revised assessment  order
of the assessing authority dated 28th november 1952, and not
the deputy commissioner's order dated 21st august 1954. [736
c]
the  objection  taken by the board was with  regard  to  the
question of exemption allowed by the assessing authority  on
the  value  of  cotton  purchased  from  outside,  and  that
question  was  not'  raised in revision  before  the  deputy
commissioner of commercial taxes. [736 c-d]
(ii)it  cannot  be  said  that  the  order  of  the  deputy
commissioner  of commercial taxes, in revision, is the  only
operative decision in law on the basis that the order of the
inferior  tribunal  (the order of  the  assessing  authority
dated  28th  november 1952) merged in that of  the  superior
tribunal  (order  of the deputy commissioner  of  commercial
taxes, dated 21st august 1954). [736 f]
the  application  of the doctrine of merger depends  on  the
nature of the appellate or revisional order in each case and
the scope of the statu-
                            733
tory  provisions  conferring  the  appellate  or  revisional
jurisdiction.   in the circumstances of the present case  it
could  not be said that there was a merger of the  order  of
assessment  dated  november  28,  1952  with  the  order  in
revision  dated 21st august 1954, because, the  question  of
exclusion  of the value of yarn purchased from  outside  the
state  was  not the subject-matter of  revision  before  the
deputy commissioner of commercial taxes. [737 a-b, f-h]
commissioner  of income-tax, bombay v. amritlal  bhogilal  &
co. [1959] s.c.r. 713 and state of uttar pradesh v. mohammed
nooh, [1958] s.c.r. 595, followed.
judgment:state of madras vs madurai mills co., ltd on 4 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28118/ 2civil appellate jurisdiction : civil appeal no. 539 of 1965. appeal by special leave from the
judgment and order dated september 13, 1961 of the madras high court in t.c. no. 162 of 1958.
bishan narain and a. v. rangam, for the appellant. a. k. sen and d. n. gupta, for the respondent.
the judgment of the court was delivered by ramaswami, j. this appeal is brought by special leave
against the judgment of the madras high court dated the 13th september, 1961 in t.c. 162 of 1958.
themadurai mills co., ltd., (hereinafter called the respondent) isa dealer in yarn, purchasing raw
material like cotton staple-fibre, etc., manufacturing them into yarn and selling the yarn. in the
assessment year 1950-51, the respondent showed a return of rs. 15,27,61,883-8-4 before the deputy
commercial tax officer, madurai who after scrutiny of the account books determined the net
turnover at rs. 15,44,09,109-3-1 1. the respondent preferred an appeal before the commercial tax
officer madurai south. it was contended on behalf of the respondent that a sum of rs.
1,44,294-14-4 was wrongly included by the first assessing authority in the purchase value of cotton
purchased by it for production of yarn as that amount only represented the commission paid by it to
comorin investment trading company limited for the purchase it was also contended that another
sum of rs. 81,546-0-1 which represented sale proceeds realised by selling empty drums etc. was not
realisation in the course of its business. the commercial tax officer upheld the first contention of
the respondent and excluded the sum of rs. 1,44,294-14-4 from the total turnover on the ground
that the amount was commission paid by the respondent for the purchase of cotton, but rejected
their second contention with regard to the sum of rs. 81,546-0- 1. the deputy commercial tax
officer thereafter issued a revised assessment. the respondent presented a revision petition before
the deputy commissioner of commercial taxes and the only objection which the respondent raised
was that it should not have been assessed to tax on amounts collected by it by way ,of tax amounting
to rs. 6,57,971-4-9. the respondent did not raise any other objection regarding the order of
assessment of the deputy commercial tax officer or the commercial tax officer. by his order,
dated the 21st august, 1954, the deputy commissioner of commercial taxes dismissed the revision
petition holding that the respondent was not entitled to raise the contention for the first time and
that even otherwise the madras general sales tax (definition of turnover and validation of
assessments) act, 1954, permitted the inclusion of tax in the taxable turnover. on the 4th august,
1958, the board of revenue issued a notice to the respondent stating that it proposed to revise the
assessment of the deputy commercial tax officer, madurai, by including in the net turnover the
sum of rs. 7,74,62,706-1-6 as that amount was wrongly excluded by the assessing authority. the
respondent objected to the proposed revision on the ground that the proceeding was barred by
limitation under s. 12 of the madras general sales tax act. the respondent also submitted -that
there was no wrong exclusion of the sum of rs. 7,74,62,706-1-6 by the deputy commercial tax
officer in making the assessment. by its order, dated the 25th august, 1958, the board of revenue
over-ruled both these contentions of the respondent and fixed the net taxable turnover as rs.
23,17,15,948-15-2. the respondent preferred an appeal to the madras high court against the order
of the board of revenue dated the 25th august, 1958. the high court allowed the appeal holding
that the board of revenue could not invoke its revisional jurisdiction after the expiry of the period of
limitation under s. 12 (4)(b) of the madras general sales tax act. the order of the board of
revenue, dated the 25th august, 1958 was accordingly set aside.state of madras vs madurai mills co., ltd on 4 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28118/ 3the question of law to be determined in this appeal is whether the order of the board of revenue
dated the 25th august, 1958 was illegal because there was a contravention of the rule of limitation
laid down by s. 12(4)(b) of the madras general sales tax act inasmuch as the order of the board of
revenue was made after a period of 4 years from the date on which the ,order of the deputy
commercial tax officer was communicated to the assessee. section 12 of the madras general sales
tax act, 1939 (madras act 9 of 1939) (hereinafter called the act) provides -- "(1) the commercial
tax officer may-
(i) suo motu, or
(ii) in cases in which an appeal does not he to him under section 11, on application-, call for and
examine the record of any order passed or proceeding recorded under the provisions of this act by
any officer subordinate to him, for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of
such order, or as to the regularity of such proceeding, and may pass such order with respect thereto
as he thinks fit.
(2) the deputy commissioner may -
(i) suo motu, or
(ii)in respect of any order passed or proceeding recorded by the commercial tax officer under
sub-section (1) or any other provision of this act and against which no appeal has been preferred to
the appellate tribunal under section 12-a, on application, call for and examine the record of any
order passed or proceeding recorded under the provisions of this act by any officer subordinate to
him, for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of such order, or as to the
regularity of such proceeding, and may pass such order with respect thereto as he thinks fit.
(3) the board of revenue may-
(i) suo motu, or
(ii)in respect of any order passed or proceeding recorded by the deputy commissioner under
sub-section (2) or any other provision of this act and against which no appeal has been preferred to
the appellate tribunal under s. 12-a. on application, call for and examine the record of any order
passed or proceeding recorded under the provisions of this act by any officer subordinate to it, for
the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of such order, or as to the regularity of
such proceeding, and may pass such order with respect thereto as it thinks fit., (4) in relation to an
order of assessment passed under this act-
(a) the power of the commercial tax officer under clause
(i) of sub-section (1) shall be exercisable only within a period of three years from the date on which
the order was communicated to the assessee;state of madras vs madurai mills co., ltd on 4 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28118/ 4(b) the power of the deputy commissioner under clause (i) of sub-section (2) and that of the board
of revenue under clause (i) of sub-section (3) shall be exercisable only within a period of four years
from the date on which the order was communicated to the assessee". it was contended on behalf of
the appellant that the order revised by the board of revenue was the revisional order of the deputy
commissioner of commercial taxes dated the 21st august, 1954 and not the order of the deputy
commercial tax officer and therefore the power of revision by the board of revenue was not
exercised beyond the period of limitation provided by s. 12 (4) (b) of the act. we are unable to
accept this argument as correct. the only subject-matter of the revision proceedings before the
board of revenue was the revised assessment order of the deputy commercial tax officer, madurai
dated the 28th november, 1952. the objection taken by the board of revenue was with regard to the
question of exemption allowed on the value of the cotton purchased from outside the state of
madras. the exemption was allowed by the deputy commercial tax officer in his order of
assessment. the question was not raised before the deputy commissioner of commercial taxes and
the only point raised before him was with regard to the inclusion of the amount of tax to the extent
of rs. 6,57,971-4-9 in the taxable turnover. it is manifest that the subject-matter of the revision
proceedings before the board of revenue was the revised assessment order of the de- puty
commercial tax officer, madurai dated the 28th november, 1952. it follows that the order of the
board of revenue was made beyond the limit of four years prescribed by s. 12(4)(b) of the act and it
is, therefore, invalid. on behalf of the appellant, the argument was put forward that if a statutory
appeal is provided against an order passed by a tribunal, the decision of the appellate authority is
the operative decision in law. it was said that if the appellate authority modifies or reverses the
order of the tribunal, there was a merger of the latter order with the appellate order and it was the
appellate order alone that is effective and can be enforced. but if the appellate order affirms the
order of the tribunal, there is a merger of the original order in the appellate order and it is the
appellate order alone which is operative andcapable of enforcement. in support of this argument
reliance was placed upon the observation of gajendragadkar, j., as he then was in commissioner of
income-tax, bombay v. amritlal bhogilal & co. (1) but the doctrine of merger is not a doctrine of
rigid and universal application and it cannot be said that wherever there are two orders, one by the
inferior tribunal and the other by a superior tribunal, passed in an appeal on revision, there is a
fusion of merger of two orders irrespective of the subject-matter of the appellate or revisional order
and the (1) [1959] s.c.r. 713 : 34 i.t.r. 130 at 136.
scope of the appeal or revision contemplated by the particular statute. in our opinion, the
application of the doctrine depends on the nature of the appellate or revisional order in each case
and the scope of the statutory provisions conferring the appellate or revisional jurisdiction. for
example in amritlal bhogilal & co's.(1) case it was observed by this court that the order of regis-
tration made by the income-tax officer did not merge in the appellate order of the appellate
commissioner, because the order of registration was not the subject-matter of appeal before the
appellate authority. it should be noticed that the order of assessment made by the income-tax
officer in that case was a composite order viz., an, order granting registration of the firm and
making an assessment on the basis of the registration. the appeal was taken by the assessee to the
appellate commissioner against the composite order of the income-tax officer. it was held by the
high court that the order of the income-tax officer granting registration to the respondent must be
deemed to be merged in the appellate order and that the revisional power of the commissioner ofstate of madras vs madurai mills co., ltd on 4 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28118/ 5income-tax cannot, therefore, be exercised in respect of it. the view taken by the high court was
over-ruled by this court for the reason that the order of the income-tax officer granting registration
cannot be deemed to have merged in the order of the appellate commissioner in an appeal taken
against the composite order of assessment. similarly, in the state of uttar pradesh v. mohammed
nooh(2), it was held by this court that the principle of merger cannot apply in the case of an order
of dismissal of a public servant which was made by the departmental tribunal on the 20th april,
1948 and against which the appeal was dismissed by the appellate authority on the 7th may, 1949,
and the revisional application was rejected on the 22nd april, 1950. in the circumstances of the
present case, it cannot be said that there was a merger of the order of assessment made by the
deputy commercial tax officer dated the 28th november, 1952 with the order of the deputy
commissioner of commercial taxes dated the 21st august, 1954 because the question of exemption
on the value of yarn purchased from outside the state of madras was not the subject-matter of
revision before the deputy commissioner of commercial taxes. the only point that was urged
before the deputy commissioner was that the sum of rs. 6,57,971-4-9 collected by the respondent
by way of tax should not be included in the taxable turnover. this was the only point raised before
the deputy commissioner and was rejected by him in the revision proceedings. on the contrary, the
question before the board. of revenue was whether the deputy commercial tax officer, madurai
was right in excluding from the net taxable turnover of the respondent the sum of rs.
7,74,62,706-1-6 which was the value of cotton purchased by the respondent from outside the state of
madras. we are (1)[1959] s.c.r. 713:341.t.r. :130 at 136. (2) [1958] s.c.r. 595.
'therefore, of opinion that the doctrine of merger cannot be invoked in the circumstances of the
present case. for these reasons, we hold that the judgment of the high court is right and this appeal
must be dismissed with costs.
v.p.s.                                 appeal dismissed.state of madras vs madurai mills co., ltd on 4 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28118/ 6