supreme court of india
prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
equivalent citations: 1986 air 687, 1985 scr (3) 697
author: s mukharji
bench: mukharji, sabyasachi (j)
           petitioner:
prakash chandra mehta
        vs.
respondent:
commissioner and secretary government of kerala & ors.
date of judgment12/04/1985
bench:
mukharji, sabyasachi (j)
bench:
mukharji, sabyasachi (j)
fazalali, syed murtaza
varadarajan, a. (j)
citation:
 1986 air  687            1985 scr  (3) 697
 1985 scc  supl.  144     1985 scale  (1)813
 citator info :
 rf         1986 sc2177  (47)
 d          1987 sc1192  (12)
 rf         1988 sc 723  (9)
 f          1990 sc 176  (28)
 rf         1990 sc 605  (11,12)
 rf         1990 sc1272  (11)
 d          1991 sc1375  (4)
act:
     constitution of  india 1950  act. 22  cls. (4)  &  (5)-
preventive  detention-permissibility   of-safeguards  to  be
followed by  the detaining  authority-rights of  detenu-what
are-grounds for detention-what are
     conservation of  foreign  exchange  and  prevention  of
smuggling activities  act 1974 ss 3 and 5a-detention-grounds
of detention-communication  in a  language understood by the
detenu at  the earliest-afford  the detenu an opportunity to
make a  representation-confession statements  under s 108 of
the customs act  1962-retraction by detenu-non-consideration
by detaining  authority but  considered by  advisory  board-
whether vitiates detention
     words & phrases-meaning of
     " grounds"  -content of  in  detention  order-not  mere
factual inferences  plus  factual  material-constitution  of
india 1950 article 2 (5).prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 1headnote:
     the petitioner  in his  three writ petitions under art.
32 challenged  the detention orders made against his father,
sister  and   brother  under  the  conservation  of  foreign
exchange and prevention of smuggling activities act 1974.
     on the  basis  of  intelligence  reports,  the  customs
officials searched  the room  of the  hotel where father and
daughter-venilal d. mehta and pragna mehta were staying. the
search led  to the  recovery of  60 gold biscuits of foreign
origin from  the suit  case belonging to the daughter. since
both of  them had  no valid  document to prove the nature or
import of the gold biscuits to..
698
india  and   for   their   legal   possession,   there   was
contravention of  the customs act, 1962 and the gold control
act, 1960,  and, therefore,  liable for  confiscation.  both
were arrested and statements recorded.
     in the  meanwhile bharat  mehta,  another  son  of  the
father, -detenu  who had  come from  calcutta to arrange for
bail was  arrested on 4th may 1984 by the central excise and
customs officials  after his room in the hotel, was searched
and indian  currency notes  amounting  to  rs.  24,865  were
seized, which he allegedly had brought for meeting the legal
expenses for  securing release  of his  father and sister on
bail. all  the three  were remanded  to jail  custody.  they
retracted their  statements made  before the  central excise
and customs  officers alleging  that they  were made  at the
dictates of the customs officers.
     pragna mehta  was served  with a  detention order under
the conservation  of  foreign  exchange  and  prevention  of
smuggling activities  act 1974  under  s.  3(1) (iii) on 20th
june 1984  and was  served with  the grounds of detention in
english  language.  hindi  translation  of  the  grounds  of
detention was  served on  30th june, 1984. venilal mehta and
his son bharat mehta were served with detention orders under
s. 3(1)  (iii) and (iv) of the act on 20th june, 1984 and on
1) 25th june, 1984 the grounds of detention were also served
on them.  the grounds  of detention were in english language
while some  of the accompanying documents were in malayalam.
the detenus made representations for the revocation of their
detention. they  appeared before  the advisory  board on 6th
august, 1984.  the advisory  board reported  that there  was
sufficient  cause   for  detention   of  the   detenus   and
accordingly the  govt. confirmed  their detention  orders on
13th august, 1984.
     all the  three detention  orders have  been  challenged
contending: (1)  that the  grounds were  not communicated to
the detenus  in a  language understood by them, (2) that the
retraction of  the confessions  or statements  made under s.
108 of  the customs  act,  1962  had  not  been  taken  intoprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 2consideration, (3)  that there  was  delay  in  serving  the
grounds upon  the detenus,  (4) that  the detenus  were  not
allowed to  be  represented  properly  before  the  advisory
board, (5)  that the  fact of  retraction of the confessions
having not  been taken  into consideration  the  proceedings
were vitiated,  and (6) that the detaining authority did not
independently consider  the representations  of the  detenus
but mechanically followed the advice of the advisory board.
     dismissing the petitions,
^
     held: 1.  the procedural  safeguards have been complied
with as  far as  practicable. there  are no  merits  in  the
fancied grievances of the detenus .[732]
     2. article  22 of  the constitution  ensures protection
against arrest  and detention  except in  certain prescribed
circumstances and conditions. art. 22(4)
699
stipulates that  no law  providing for  preventive detention
shall authorise  the   detention of  a person  for a  longer
period than  three months  unless  (a)  advisory  board  has
reported before  the expiration  of the said period of three
months that  there is  in its  opinion sufficient  cause for
such detention and (b) such person is detained in accordance
with the  provision of  any law made by the parliament under
sub-cls. (a) and (b) of cl. (7). [618d-g]
     clause (5)  of art.  22 provides  that the  grounds  of
detention must  be communicated to the detenu as soon as may
be and  that he  should be afforded the earliest opportunity
of making  a representation  against the order. there. fore,
it must  follow as  an imperative  that the  grounds must be
communicated in  a language understood by the person so that
he can make an effective representation. [719; 72013-c]
     harikisan v. the state of maharashtra & others, [1962]
 2 supp. scr 918. c
     in the instant case, the facts revealed that the detenu
vanilal mehta  was constantly  accompanied and  was  in  the
company of his daughter as well as his son-both of whom knew
english very  well. the  father signed his mercy petition in
gujrati which was written in english, accepting the guilt of
his involvement  in smuggling.  there is no rule of law that
common sense should be put in cold storage while considering
constitutional provisions  for safeguards  against misuse of
powers by authorities though these constitutional previsions
should be  strictly construed.  he was in any event given by
30th june 1984 the hindi translation of the grounds of which
he claimed ignorance. the gist of annexures which were given
in malayalam  language had  been stated in the grounds. that
he does  not know anything except gujrati  merely ipse dixit
of father  -detenu and is not the last word and the court is
not denuded  to its powers to examine the truth the court is
not the  place where  one can  sell all tales. the detaining
authority came  to the  conclusion that  he knew both  hindi
and english. it has been stated so in the counter-affidavit.prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 3the circumstances  indicate that  father -detenu  was merely
feigning ignorance of english
                                           [720c-h; 720 a-b]
     in the  instant case,  the grounds  were given  on 20th
june, 1984 following the search and seizure of gold biscuits
from room  of detenu  venilal mehta  in  the  hotel  in  his
presence and in the background or the mercy petition, he was
in constant touch with his daughter and sons and there is no
evidence that  these people  did not  know hindi or english.
indeed they  knew english  as well as hindi. it is difficult
to accept  the position  that in  the peculiar facts of this
case, the  grounds were  not communicated  in this sense the
grounds of  detention were  not  conveyed  to  the    detenu
venilal. whether  grounds were  communicated or  not  detenu
upon the fact and circumstances of each case. [712 d-f]
     hadibandhu das  v. district  magistrate, cuttack & anr.
[1969] 1  scr 227, nainmal partap mal shah v. union of india
and ors [1980] 4 scc 427 and ibrahim ahmad batti v. state of
gujrat & ors. [1983] 1  scr 540 distinguished.
700
     4 article  22(5)  of  the constitution  has two elements
(i) communication  of the  grounds on  which  the  order  of
detention has  been made  and  (ii)  opportunity  of  making
representation against the order of detention. communication
of the  grounds pre-supposes  the formulation of the grounds
and formulation  of the  ground  requires  and  ensures  the
application of  the mind  of the  detaining authority to the
facts and  materials before  it that  is to say to pertinent
and proximate  matters in regard to each individual case and
excludes the element of arbitrariness and automatism. [725e-
g]
     5. the "ground." under art 22(s) of the constitution do
not mean mere factual inferences but mean factual inferences
plus factual  material  which led to such factual inferences
the concept  of'grounds'.,  therefore'  has  to  receive  an
interpretation which  will keep it meaningfully in tune with
the contemporary notions of the realities of the society and
the purpose  of the act in question in the light of concepts
of liberty  and fundamental freedom guaranteed by art. 19(1)
21 and 22 of the constitution[725-h; 726 a-b]
     smt. shalini  soni etc. v. union of india & ors. [1981]
1 scr 962 relied upon.
     6. a  democratic constitution  is not to be interpreted
merely from  a lexicographer's  angle but with a realisation
that  it  is  an  embodiment  of  the  living  thoughts  and
aspiration of  a free  people. the concept of "grounds" used
in  the   context  of   detention  in   art.  22(5)  of  the
constitution and  in sub s. (3) of s.3 of cofeposa therefore
has  to   receive  an  interpretation  which  will  keep  it
meaningfully in  tune with  a contemporary notion. while the
expression "grounds"  for  that  matter  includes  not  only
conclusion of  facts but also all the "basic facts" on which
those conclusions  were founded,  they  are  different  fromprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 4subsidiary  facts   or  further  particulars  or  the  basic
facts.[726c-e]
     hasmukh s/o  bhagwanji m. patel v. the state of gujarat
judgment:
in the instant ease the grounds of detention is the satisfaction of the detaining authority that with a
view to preventing the detenu from acting in any manner prejudicial to the conservation or
augmentation of foreign exchange or with a view to preventing the detenu from inter alia, dealing in
smuggled goods otherwise then by engaging in transporting or concealing or keeping the smuggled
goods or engaging in transporting or concealing or keeping smuggled goods the detention of the
detenu us necessary this satisfaction was arrived at an inferences from several factors. one of them
is that the retraction from the statements made in the confession or statements under s. 108 of the
customs act had not been taken into consideration by the detaining authority while passing
detention order. the question is whether even if the facts stated in the confession are completely
ignored then the inferences can still be drawn from other independent and objective facts
mentioned in this case , namely , the fact of seizure of 60 gold biscuits from the suitcase of the
daughter in the presence of the father which indubitably belonged to the father and admitted by him
to belong to him for which no explanation has been given and secondly the seizure of the papers
connected with other groups and organisations to whom gold has been sold by the father are
relevant grounds from which an inference can reasonably be drawn for the satisfaction of the
detaining authority for detaining the detenus for the purpose of sec. 3(1) (iii) and 3(1)(iv) the
impugned order cannot be challenged merely by the rejection of the inference drawn from
confession. [726e-h; 727a-c]
7.(i) the court is not concerned with the sufficiency of the grounds. it is concerned whether there
arc relevant materials on which a reasonable belief or conviction could have been entertained by the
detaining authority on the grounds mentioned in s. 3(1) of the act. whether other grounds should
have been taken into consideration or not is not relevant at the stage of the passing of the detention
order. if that in the position then in view of s. 5a of the act there was sufficient material to sustain
this ground of detention. [727d-e]
(ii) when detention under  s. 3 or the act is only for the purpose of prevention of smuggling and all
the grounds , whether there are one or more , would be relatable only to various activities of
smuggling and no other separate ground which could deal with matters other than smuggling could
be conceived of because the act of smuggling covered several activities each forming a separate
ground of detention and the act dealt with no other act except smuggling , whenever allegations of
smuggling were made against a person who was sought to be detained for preventing further
smuggling there is bound to be one act or several acts with the common object of smuggling goods
which was sought to be prevented by the act.' it would , therefore , not be correct to say 1 that the
object of the act constituted the ground for detention. in the instant case , however , the authorities
concerned came to the conclusion that the detenus were engaged in smuggling , in support of the
same they relied on several factors namely: (1) the search and seizure and recovery of 60 gold
biscuits , (2) the fact that the importation of the 60 gold biscuits could not be explained by the
detenu venilal , (3) the secretive manner in which the said gold biscuits were kept and (4) the
connection with the various dealers and the statements of the employees of the dealers that theprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 5father and the sons used to come with gold bars. these materials were in addition to the statements
and concessions made under s. 108 of the customs act by the father , the sons and the daughter. so
even if the statements made by the n are ignored and obliterated , the other facts remain and these
are- good enough materials to come to prima facie belief that detention of the detenus was
necessary.
state or gujrat v. chamanlal manjibhai soni [1981] 2 scr 500 followed.
in the instant case , there was no request for consultation with the advocate. there is no case of
non- production of the detenu in spite of intimation by the advocate to the customs officers before
a magistrate. the confessional statement was not the only fact upon which the detaining authority
had passed an order. in the premises even if the confessional statements which were ret-
racted as such could not be taken into consideration , there are other facts independent of the
confessional statement which can reasonably lead to the satisfaction that the authorities had come
to. [729e-g] ashadevi , wife of gopal chermal mehta (detenu) v. k. shiveraj addl. chief secretary
to the government of gujrat & anr. [1979] 2 scr 215 , distinguished.
in the instant case , there was no delay in serving the grounds upon the detenus. the father-detenu
was detained on 20th june , 1984. as required under s.8 (3) of the act , the case of the detenu was
referred to the advisory board on 18th july , 1984. the representations submitted by the detenu
were also forwarded to the advisory board for consideration. the services of two persons were
utilised by the board in understanding the statement of the detenu and deciphering the
representation in gujrati submitted by detenu venilal mehta to the state government which was
also forwarded to the board. therefore , it cannot be said that detenus have not been given proper
facility to be represented before the advisory board. tee allegation that the detaining authority did
not independently consider the representation of the detenu but mechanically followed the opinion
of the advisory board cannot be sustained in view of the fact and circumstances of this case.[759h;
j30 a-d] & criminal original jurisdiction : writ petition (criminal) nos.1721 , 1722 and
1724 of 1984. under article 32 of the constitution of india. p. govindan nair , g.l. sanghi , farook
m. razaak and h.k. puri for the petitioners.
t.s. krishnamurthy iyer and e.m.s. anam for respondent nos. 1 and 2.
n.c. talukdar and , r.n. poddar for the respondent no.3.
the judgment of the court was delivered by sabyasachi mukharji , j. one allegedly venilal d.
mehta is the father. miss pragna mehta is the daughter and bharat mehta is the son. they all have
been detained under the pro visions of conservation of foreign exchange and prevention of
smuggling activities act , 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the 'act') , by virtue of an order dated 19th
june , 1984.
their detentions are challenged in three writ petitions under article 32 of the constitution , filed by
prakash chandra mehta , another son of venilal d. mehta and brother of miss pragna mehta andprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 6bharat mehta.
the facts of these cases basically more or less are the same with certain minor variations which
would be noticed.
on the 2nd may , 1984 , the father and daughter venilal d. mehta and pragna mehta were arrested
by the officers of the central excise and customs , cochin on all accusation of having in their
possession 60 gold biscuits alleged to be of foreign origin. after their arrest , the father and his
daughter were taken to the office of the central excise and customs , cochin where statements were
made on their behalf. it is , however , the allegation of the petitioner that such statements were
obtained by use of third degree method , molestation of the daughter , threat and intimidation. we
are not concerned with the truth or otherwise of such allegation for the purpose of this application.
the statements of the daughter as well as the father were written by the daughter. it is further
alleged in the petition that the statement was written by the daughter as dictated by the officers
concerned. the father , venilal d. mehta put his signature in english as 'balvant shah'. it must be
noted that statement in english was written by the daughter. lt is alleged that the father and the
daughter told the officers concerned that the correct name of the father was venilal mehta. it is the
case of the father in the petition on his behalf that he does not understand , read or speak or write
english but he can only sign his name in english. after the said statement. the father and the
daughter were taken to the hotel dwarka where they were kept in separate rooms under the guard
of the officers. [t is alleged on behalf of the father and the daughter that no legal assistance was
allowed in spite of repeated requests.
on the next day , the father and the daughter were brought to the office of the central excise and
customs , cochin , where once again , the daughter wrote a statement on her behalf and on behalf of
her father. it is alleged that neither the said statement was explained to the father nor a copy was
supplied. after the said recording of the statement , both the father and the daughter were kept
detained at the customs department.
in the meanwhile one bharat mehta , another son of the father venilal mehta who had come from
calcutta to arrange for bail was brought under arrest by the officers of the central excise in the
presence of the father and was asked to identify the father and his sister whereupon shri bharat
mehta identified shri venilal d. mehta as his father and miss pragna mehta as his sister. upon such
identification , miss pragna mehta wrote down a third statement-one on behalf of her father and
one on her own behalf. it is alleged that such statements were dictated by the officers of the central
excise.
bharat mehta also wrote down a statement on his behalf which is similarly alleged to have been
written as dictated by the officers. then all the three aforesaid persons venilal d. mehta , miss
pragna mehta and bharat mehta were produced before the acting chief judicial magistrate on 5th
may , 1984 at 8. 30 p.m. at his residence at vanala and were reminded to jail custody.
so far as bharat mehta is concerned , on 2nd may , 1984 , he was in calcutta and he was informed
by his brother from bombay that his father venilal mehta and his sister pragna mehta had beenprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 7arrested and upon hearing that he left for bombay and arrived in bombay by the evening flight. on
the following day i. e. on 3rd may. 1984 , bharat mehta left on the morning flight for cochin for
arranging bail for his father and sister. at the cochin airport , he was apprehended by the officers of
the central excise who desired to interrogate him and was thereupon brought to the office of the
central excise and was interrogated about his complexity in the smuggling of gold. according to
bharat mehta , as he had nothing to do with the smuggling of gold , he denied having any
connection with the same. thereafter he was allowed to go. on 4th may , 1984 the room in the
indian airlines hotel. ernakulam where he was staying was searched by the officers of the central
excise and customs. though bharat mehta states that nothing incriminating was found , the
custom authorities had seized indian currency notes amounting to rs. 24,865 which sum , he
alleged to have brought for meeting the legal expenses. thereafter , he was arrested and taken to
identify his father and sister as mentioned hereinbefore. when all the three were remanded to jail
custody , the father , the daughter and the son retracted their statements. they made complaints to
the collector of central excise and customs about the manner in which their statements were
obtained. application for bail was moved on 7th may , 1984 before the learned acting chief judicial
magistrate miss pragna mehta was allowed interim bail till 7th may , 1984. on 8th may , 1984 the
bail application was rejected. after the cancellation of her bail application , pragna mehta moved an
application under section 439 of the code of criminal procedure , 1973 before the kerala high court
and the high court was pleased to grant bail on certain conditions. she was served with the
detention order on 20th june , 1984 , and the detenu was served with the grounds of detention in
english language. hindi translation of the grounds of detention was served on , the detenu on 30th
june , 1984.
the father's bail application was , however , rejected by the kerala high court. the father was
transferred on 24th may , 1984 from sub-jail , ernakulam. to the general hospital , ernakulam
because he had become ill. he was thereafter admitted in the general hospital.
the son's bail application was also rejected by the high court of kerala and he was also transferred
to the general , hospital , ernakulam because he became ill. thereafter on 6th june , 1984 ,
application for grant of bail was moved on behalf of the father and the son before the sessions judge
and the said application was rejected on 12th june , 1984 in respect of both of them.
both bharat mehta and venilal mehta were transferred to the medical college hospital , kottayam
for treatment. on 20th june 1984 , the father and the son while in custody and undergoing
treatment in medical college hospital were served with the detention orders under the said act.
thereafter they were transferred to the central prison , trivandrum.
on 25th june , 1984 , the grounds were served on all three of them. it is alleged that the said
grounds were served nearly at midnight and said grounds served were written in english while some
of the accompanying documents about six in number were in malayalam.
on 25th july , 1984 miss pragna mehta made an application praying , inter alia that the order of
detention by revoked and she may be set at liberty. on 4th august , 1984 , she wrote a letter to the
chairman , advisory board seeking the assistance of a legal practitioner or a friend during theprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 8advisory board proceedings. it is alleged that on or about 6th august , 1984 , she was informed at
9.00 a.m. for the first time that she had to appear before the advisory board at 10.00 a.m.
it is her case that she appeared without being given an opportunity of being assisted by any friend.
she further alleges that she being the only lady detenu in solitary confinement , after coming back
from the advisory board meeting made a representation to the detaining authority for certain jail
facilities namely , facility of home cooked food, reading and writing materials , frequent interviews
with relations and friends , facility of writing letters to mother in gujrati language , sewing and
embroidery materials and hygienic toilet facility.
she made a representation to the central government on 9th august. 1981 for revocation of her
detention order.
on 11th august , 1984 , a letter was received by her from the commissioner and secretary to
government , government of kerala respondent no. 1 that there was no provision for home cooked
food and there was no solitary confinement , that interviews , and all outgoing and incoming letters
are required to be censored and no special restrictions have been imposed upon her. she alleges that
on 13th august , 1984 , she came to know from the jail authorities that the advisory board had
confirmed the detention of her and of brother and father for one year and that the opinion of the
advisory board was published in the local newspaper mothrubhumi on 13th august , 1984.
on 23rd august , 1984 she received a letter that her representation dated 25th july , 1984 had been
rejected on 24th august , 1984 she received a letter from the under secretary to the government of
india in terms whereof she was informed that her repre-
sentation dated 9th august , 1984 addressed to the central government had been rejected.
on 23th august , 1984 , she was served with an order issued by respondent no. 1 whereby she was
informed that the advisory board in its report had expressed that there was sufficient cause for
detention of the detenu and accordingly , the government confirmed the order of detention for a
period of one year.
so far as father , venilal mehta is concerned , it is his case that hindi translation of grounds of
detention was served on him on 30th june , 1984. while supplying the hindi translation of the
grounds , the annexures being annexure nos. 1. 6 , 8 , 27 , 38 and 47 of the list of documents were
supplied in malayalam. it is the case of the father that he does not know how to read , write or speak
english or hindi or malayalam. he can only sign his name in english. but thereafter on 27th may ,
1984 he made a representation in gujrati to the detaining authority praying that he was unable to
read , write either english or hindi or malayalam and the grounds of detention may be given to him
duly translated in gujrati.
on 5th august , 1984 , he was informed by a letter dated 4th august , 1984 that his representation
could only be examined after the same was translated into english. on 5th august , 1984 he made a
representation to the detaining authority praying that his detention order may be revoked. he wasprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 9informed on 6th august , 1984 at 9. 15 a. m. that he would have to appear before the advisory board
at 10.00 a.m. he appeared before the advisory board and the advisory board had confirmed his
order of detention on 13th august , 1984. he received a letter on 25th august , 1984 that his request
for supply of grounds of detention and connected documents was not considered necessary by the
government. the representation dated 9th august , 1984 was rejected and the same was
communicated to him by a letter dated 28th august , 1984 , and he was informed on 31st august ,
1984 that the advisory board was of the opinion that there was sufficient ground for detention. he
was also informed by a letter dated 10th august , 1984 that his representation dated 5th august ,
1984 had been rejected.
more or less similar is the case of the son except that he did not plead ignorance of any language
english or hindi.
as mentioned hereinafter , all the three detention orders have been challenged by prakash chandra
mehta , the son of venilal mehta and brother of bharat mehta and pragna mehta by these three
separate writ petitions.
the father had on or about 30th june , 1984 made a representation for mercy. it was written in
english but signed in gujrati. it is the case of the father that his son brought this representation
prepared by his wife and without understanding he signed the representation for forwarding the
same to the proper authorities. the detenu venilal mehta , the father and bharat mehta , the son ,
were detained on grounds mentioned in section 3 (1) (iii) and 3 (i) (iv) of the act and the detenu
miss pragna mehta , the daughter was detained on grounds mentioned in section 3 (i) (iii) of the
said act. the said orders were dated 19th june , 1984 were served on 20th june , 1984 alongwith the
grounds in english it was further mentioned in the communications containing the said grounds
that the said grounds were being communicated to them for the purpose of article 22 (5) of the
constitution and they were given opportunities to make representation against the said grounds.
the grounds of detention stated that on the basis of intelligence received a search of room no. 316 of
dwaraka hotel at m.g. road , ernakulam , was conducted and after being identified it was stated
that the customs authorities had reason to believe that gold of foreign origin was kept in the room in
the custody of b.v. shah in contravention of the provisions of the customs act , 1962 and gold
control act , 1960. the occupants of the room , the father and the daughter had informed that they
were not having any such articles. thereafter the superintendent and the party made a through
search in the presence of the independent witnesses , the occupants and the accountant of the hotel ,
mr. jayaprakash. in addition to the furniture in the room there were three suitcases and one vanity
bag in side the room. on enquiry , the father informed that two of the suitcases belonged to him and
the third suitcase and the vanity bag belonged to his daughter. the superintendent requested the
daughter to identify her suitcase and accordingly she identified a brown coloured suitcase marked
aristocrat and vanity bag as hers. the two suitcases claimed to be of the father were examined by
the superintendent. there were no gold or incriminating documents in the suitcases. the
superintendent asked the daughter to open her suitcase and accordingly she opened the suitcase by
taking a key from her vanity bag. when she opened , the suitcase was found to contain one inflated
air pillow and certain personal clothings- beneath the air pillow and the personal clothings , thereprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 10was some thing warped in a turkish towel. when the turkish towel was removed three paper
packets with abnormal weight were found. the superintendent enquired or the daughter about the
contents of the three packets and she had remained silent. immediately the father disclosed that the
packets contained gold biscuits of foreign origin. when the superintendent asked about the quantity
, the father informed that the three packets totally contained 60 gold biscuits , with 25 gold biscuits
each in two bigger packets and 10 gold biscuits in the small packet. all the three packets were
covered with paper bearing printed english letters. the three packets were opened and examined
and found to contain 60 gold biscuits , with 25 gold his suits each in two packets and 10 gold biscuits
in the third packet. all the 60 gold biscuits were thoroughly examined , weighed and purity tested by
a certified goldsmith. each gold biscuits was found to be of 24 carat purity with a weight of 116.5
grams. the total weight and other particulars of the said gold biscuits and other particulars of
certain other materials found were mentioned. it is unnecessary to set these out in detail. the
persons of both the father and the daughter were searched. nothing incriminating was found from
the daughter , but certain documents which are noted as incriminating were found from the person
of father , the particulars of the said documents have also been set out in that: grounds. it is not
relevant for our present purpose to set these out in detail.
the superintendent asked the daughter and the father whether they were having any valid
documents to prove the nature of import and prove the legal possession of the 60 gold biscuits of
foreign origin recovered from the suitcase claimed to be of the daughter. she replied that she did not
have any such document and that she carried the above said gold biscuits from bombay to cochin as
directed by her father. the father also said that he had no valid documents to prove the nature of
import of the 60 gold biscuits to india and for the possession of the same and that the daughter
carried the gold biscuits from bombay to cochin as directed by him.
in the premises it was stated that there was reasonable belief that 60 gold biscuits were smuggled
into india and acquired and possessed and dealt with in contravention of the customs act , 1962
and the gold control act , 1960 and hence were liable for confiscation.
the show cause notice further stated that the entire articles in the suitcase from which the gold
biscuits were recovered , the key of the suitcase and the documents recovered from the vanity bag of
miss pragna mehta and from the shirt pocket of venilal mehta (b.v. shah) were also seized for
further necessary action. the value of the gold biscuits seized came to round about rs. 14 lakhs. b.v
shah alias venilal mehta , miss pragna mehta and the independent
1) witnesses have signed on the documents and on the mahazar. mr. jayaprakash accountant of
dwaraka hotal had also appended his signature in the mahazar.a copy of the mahazar was also
given to b.v. shah alias venilal mehta and his acknowledgement was obtained on the original.
ground i (b) stated about the search on intelligence report of hotel airlines at m.g. road ,
ernakulam. it is not necessary to set out in detail the documents and the currency notes seized ,
particulars whereof were stated in the said show cause.prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 11in ground i (c) , the search and seizure of swastic society , bombay have been set out. certain
telephone numbers are noted. the documents seized from this place included telephone bills
installed at the residence of venilal mehta and two other telephone numbers noted in the paper.
other details of the ground and facts of the search need not be set out in detail.
in ground i (d) , it was stated that the superintendent of customs searched premises of r.d. mehta
& co. and certain particulars of telephone numbers and other documents recovered were stated
therein.
in ground i (e) , it was stated that the superintendent searched the silver refinery controlled by shri
partap sait. certain diaries and documents are seized. the telephone of the refinery is 37144. in the
documents and diaries seized from the silver refinery , phone number 625768-the phone number of
the residence of venilal mehta was found entered.
in ground i (f) , it was mentioned that certain documents were recovered from sadasiva sait , the
particulars whereof arc mentioned therein the grounds. as a result of search 10 foreign made gold
biscuits weighing 116.500 grams each , 8 primary gold bars weighing 1714 gms. and one gold piece
weighing 95 gms. were recovered from the office room. it is further stated in the show cause notice
in ground 11 (iii) that during the sight seeing trip to cochin with family in january , 1983 venilal
mehta had contacted different jewellers in cochin. shri pratap sait of shalimar jewellery , cochin
alone responded to the business of venilal mehta.
these were entered into in the statement signed by miss pragna mehta which of course , she had
retracted thereafter from different searches at different places telephone number 37144 of pratap
sait (at the silver refinery of pratap sait) was found in various documents.
in ground ii (c) , the statements recorded under section 108 of the customs act by venilal mehta
and others were mentioned. it is not necessary in view of the fact that these statements have been
retracted , to refer and set out the said grounds in detail.
in ground ii (f) , the interrogation of bharat mehta is set out. here also the same cannot be set out
because he has also retracted.
in ground iii , it is mentioned that venilal mehta , miss pragna mehta and bharat mehta were
arrested and produced before the then chief judicial magistrate who granted permission to
interrogate shri venilal mehta and shri bharat mehta in the presence of jail superintendent.
thereafter bharat mehta was interrogated and the result of such interrogation is mentioned in
ground iv. the same again cannot be relied on because these have been retracted.
in ground v(1) , it was stated that shri pratap sait of 'mahadev parvathy house' was interrogated
under section 108 of the customs act. he denied having seen venilal mehta or b.v. shah. he also
denied any dealings with b.v. shah regarding the gold biscuits.prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 12in ground v (2) , it was stated that mr. prakash krishnan yadav , an employee of the silver refinery
was interrogated under section 108 of the customs act. he stated that his normal work in the
refinery was purifying silver. he used to purify the gold from shalimar jewellery also. he knew
bharat mehta , venilal mehta and rashmi mehta. they used to come to the refinery. they used to
meet the younger brother of pratap sait , shri suresh. they were doing some secret business. suresh
used to entrust him with certain bundles of notes to be handed over to venilal mehta or his sons.
this he used to do. the documents seized from the refinery contained the accounts of agriculture
and grapes were written by pratap sait. some times venilal mehta , bharat mehta and rashmi
mehta used to stay at hotel blue diamond and he had 1> met them while they were there. the
telephone number of the refinery , he stated , was 37144. his statement was read over to him and
admitted to be correct. this statement was not retracted.
in ground v (3) , it was stated that one shri suresh mahadeva salunkhe s/o mahadev dari
salunkhe was examined under section 108 of the customs act. he has also given certain facts about
the business of pratap sait and others. he said that pratap was looking after blue diamond hotel.
he also knew venilal mehta , bharat mehta and rashmi mehta. he further stated that venilal
mehta came to the refinery some time ago and thereafter as per the telephonic direction of his
brother , shri pratap sait , he received some gold biscuits from him and had given these to his
brother. his brother gave a bundle of currency notes. this was repeated many times.
in ground v (4) , it was stated that one shri suresh s/o damodharan , was interrogated under
section 108 of the customs act. he also stated certain facts giving the connection and the phone
number of venilal mehta. these have been set out in details in the ground. the particulars of other
grounds in v (5) need not be set out in detail.
in ground vi (i) , it was stated that as a follow up action , the house of pratap sait at convent
junction , cochin was searched. no contraband goods or incriminating documents were recovered.
shalimar jewellery was also searched in the premises , it was stated , against venilal mehta that
evidence collected showed that venilal mehta had large scale dealings in smuggled gold biscuits.a
paper bit recovered from him on 2nd may , 1984 , which show d the details of transaction and the
particulars of the writings of the paper have been set out in the show cause notice and it is further
stated that one sadasiva sait was apprehended with 2974 grams foreign gold biscuits and the
numbers shown against the letters 's' in the paper mentioned here in before related to the gold
biscuits delivered to him by venilal mehta and his sons on the dates mentioned against each. from
this , according to the respondent , it was evident that the other numbers shown were also related to
gold biscuits- as set out before , sadasiva sait in his statement stated that letters 'p' might be in
relation to pratap sait and letter 'b` might be in relation to bhim rao.
from the aforesaid , it was stated that it was evident that venilal mehta , and in the case of the other
two , son and the daughter more or less similar grounds are made , was dealing in smuggled gold
biscuit and that 60 gold biscuits weighing 6990 grams and valued at rs. 14 lakhs were seized and
that venilal mehta , sons rashmi kanth mehta and bharat mehta and miss pragna mehta were
actively engaged in the business of smuggled foreign gold biscuits. venilal mehta was the master
brain behind this business.a list of documents was annexed. the search list and the deposition andprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 13necessary documents , the panchnama and he statements were also annexed with the show cause
notice.
one of the documents which is annexed to the affidavit in opposition of the respondents is a mercy
petition which is annexure r-1 dated 30th june , 1984 addressed to the secretary and commissioner
, home & vigilance , home department , government of kerala , trivandrum through the
superintendent , central jail , trivandrum. in that he stated as follows:-
"i , venilal m mehta , beg to request you to give kindly and sympathetic attention to
the following few lines and render mercy to me.
i am an old man of 60 years. i had my peaceful life as a business man and
commanded respect in the business circle and friends. i myself am surprised to
understand what prompted me to involve in such activity as dealing in imported
gold. my financial and social status was unblemished during all these years of my
life. i would not say it was a greed it was only the destiny that played this part.
looking to my old-age and unstinted career up till now , i beg you to show mercy on
me and t o revoke the order of detention under cofeposa. i assure you that never
in my life to come , i will indulge in any such activity there are detrimental to the
nation as a whole and me in particular.
thanking you in anticipation of your favours , yours faithfully , trivandrum , sd/-
30th june , 1984. (venilal m. mehta)"
it was written in english but signed in gujrati. it was stated as mentioned before that it was signed
without understanding as this was sent by the wife of the detenu , venilal mehta.
the charges against the daughter were under section 3 (1) (iii) , and against the father , venilal
mehta and the son , bharat mehta , these were under section 3 (1) (iii) and 3 (1) (iv) of the said act.
the relevant provisions of section 3 of the said act reads as follows:-
"3. power to make orders detaining certain persons-
(1) the central government or the state government or any officer of the central government , not
below the rank of a joint secretary to that government , specially em powered for the purposes of
this section by that government , or any officer of a state government , not below the rank of a
secretary to that government , specially empowered for the purposes of this section by that
government may , if satisfied , with respect to any person (including a foreigner) , that , with a view
to preventing him from' acting in any manner prejudicial to the conservation or augmentation of
foreign exchange or with a view to preventing him from-
(i) xxxxprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 14(ii) xxxx
(iii) engaging in transporting or concealing or keeping smuggled goods , or
(iv) dealing in smuggled goods otherwise than by engaging in transporting or concealing or keeping
smuggled goods , or
(v) xxxx it is necessary so to do , make an order directing that such person be detained"
before we consider the submissions on behalf of the detenus in this case , certain board facts have to
be borne in mind. search of room no. 316 of dwarka hotel m.g. road , ernakulam , by the
superintendent of the central excise and customs , cochin stands demonstrated. it also cannot be
disputed that the occupants of the room at the time of search were venilal mehta alias b.v. mehta
and daughter pragna mehta. 60 gold biscuits were recovered from the suitcase belonging to miss
pragna mehta. details have been mentioned in ground i(a) , panchnama regarding the search and
seizure was prepared and was signed by the daughter and the father and attested by independent
witness-one of being the accountant of the hotel secondly , b.v. shah was interrogated and he made
certain statements. on 2nd may , 1984 , there was search of the house of pratap sait at ernakulam.
on the same day , shalimar jewellery fixed deposit door no. 37/8 , broadway , cochin was
searched , the statements of b.v. shah or venilal mehta , pragna mehta and bharat mehta under
section 108 even if these are ignored , there were searches and statement by one shri s. kumar and
there was also search on 14th may , 1984 of the residential quarters of venilal mehta at bombay
where telephone having no 625768 was installed. this telephone number tallied with certain papers
of pratap sait and other houses mentioned here in before.
there was search of the premises of venilal mehta in the name of r.d. mehta & co. bombay. there
also the telephone numbers 339774 and 338286 were found installed. these tallied with the
telephone numbers found in the papers in other houses the documents recovered from r.d. mehta
included telephone bills of phone no. 625768 installed at the house of venilal mehta which showed
that from the said phone trunk calls were booked to cochin telephone nos. 37144 and 33221
ernakulam , 37144 is the telephone number of silver refinery and 33221 is the telephone number of
blue diamond hotel controlled by pratap sait.
the search of silver refinery owned by pratap sait was made on 21st may , 1984. two diaries and
certain documents were seized.a panchnama was prepared. in the diary seized from the silver
refinery , telephone no. 625768 of the residence of venilal mehta was found entered.
then there was statement of prakash krishna yadav v , one of the employees of silver refinery
where he had stated venilal mehta , bharat mehta and another son of venilal m mehta used to come
to refinery. he had further stated that they (the aforesaid named persons) used the meet the
younger brother or pratap sait 1' and they were doing some secret business. suresh usual to entrust
him with bundle of notes to be handed over to venilal mehta and his sons. these statements were
made under section 108 of the customs act by these persons and these statements were not
retracted. he further stated that he had met them at hotel blue diamond when they had stayedprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 15there. in the statement of suresh m chalunka , younger brother of pratap sait , he established the
connection of b.v. shall with the refinery of pratap sait at ernakulam. he also confirmed that they
were dealing in gold biscuits. he did not know how many gold biscuits were there. mr. bharat and
mr. rashmi , sons of b.v. shah used to come , according to his statement , with gold biscuits. he
used to receive the gold biscuits and give these to his brother pratap sait.
shri suresh , receptionist of blue diamond hotel in statement on 25th may , 1984 under section 108
of customs act had stated that on 3rd may 1984 , bharat mehta contacted him over the phone and
accordingly he and bharat mehta met at oberoi hotel. bharat mehta had told him that his father
and sister were caught with gold biscuits and requested for help. on 5th june , 1984 , customs
department superintendent party arrived at the silver refinery , trichur of sadashiv sait and as a
result of the search 10 foreign made gold biscuits , 8 primary gold biscuits and 1 gold piece were
recovered. then on 5th june , 1984 , sadashiv sait was interrogated. extracts from his examination
have been set out here in before , which clearly established the connection of venilal with these
transactions. some documents were recovered from b.v. shah (venilal) while he was caught with 60
gold biscuits and letter 's' has been explained as indicated before.
on the above facts , detailed show cause notice was issued. it is true that in the said show cause , the
statements of venilal mehta on 2nd may , 1984 , 3rd may , 1984 and 4th may , 1984 were also taken
into account but annexure 'c' to letter to the collector retracting the statement was not taken into
account.
it has therefore to be examined that in view of the fact that the whole statement had been retracted ,
these statements should have been considered along with the retraction. the fact of not doing so will
require examination. it may , however , be mentioned that in the counter-affidavit , it has been
stated that the basis of the detention order was not only the statement by the detenus but also other
materials which were supplied to the detenus.
in support of these applications , the following main grounds were urged namely:
(1) the grounds were not communicated to the detenus in a language understood by them.
(2) the retraction of the confessions or statements made under section 108 of the customs act had
not been taken into consideration.
(3) there was delay in serving the grounds upon the detenus.
(4) the detenus were not allowed to be represented properly before the advisory board.
(5) the fact that there was retraction of the confession having not been taken into consideration the
proceedings were vitiated.
(6) the detaining authority did not independently consider the representation of detenus but
mechanically followed the advice of the advisory board.prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 16preventive detention under certain prescribed circumstances under the provisions of certain acts is
permissible in india with certain constitutional safeguards and the preventive detention which is
recognised and permitted by our constitution must be resorted to strictly within those
constitutional safeguards , article 22 ensures protection against arrest and detention except in
certain prescribed circumstances and conditions. article 22(4) of the constitution stipulates that no
law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a person for a longer period
than three months unless.
(a) an advisory board consisting of persons who are , or have been , or are qualified to be appointed
as , judges of a high court has reported before the expiration of the said period of three months
that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such detention;
provided that nothing in this sub-clause shall authorise the detention of any person beyond the
maximum period prescribed by any law made by parliament under sub clause (b) of clause (7); or
(b) such person is detained in accordance with the provisions of any law made by parliament under
such clauses (a) and (b) of clause (7).
clause l 5 of article 22 reads as follows:-
"(5) when any person is detained in pursuance of an order made under any law providing for
preventive detention , the authority making the order shall , as soon as may be , communicate to
such person the grounds on which the order has been made and shall afford him the earliest
opportunity of making a representation against the order'.
clause (6) provides that nothing clause (5) shall require the authority making any such order as is
referred to in that clause to disclose facts which such authority considers to be against the public
interest to disclose. clause (7) of article 2?. ensures that the parliament may make law in certain
manner prescribed in that sub-clause.
therefore it was contended that the order and grounds should be communicated to the detenus in
the languages or language they understood. according to the petitioner , venilal mehta understood
nothing except gujrati. he did not understand english or hindi or malayalam. the grounds of
detention were initially supplied to venilal mehta in english on 25th june , 1984 i.e. within five days
of his arrest or detention. but certain accompanying documents in malayalam language were
supplied to him namely , item nos. 1 , 6 , 8 , 27 , 38 and 47.
sub-section (3) of section 3 of the s lid act provides as follows:-
"for the purposes of clause (5) of article 22 of the constitution , the communication
to a person detained in 1 pursuance of a detention order of the grounds on which the
order has been made shall be made as soon as may be after the detention , but
ordinarily not later than five days , and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons
to be recorded in writing not later than fifteen days , from the date of detention."prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 17in the instant case it was submitted that assuming that venilal mehta knew hindi , the translated
copy of the english grounds was admittedly made available to him in hindi language on 30th june ,
1984-beyond a period of five days and for which neither any excep-
tional circumstances existed nor an reason given. moreover it was urged that the annexures in
malayalam language retained their places while supplying the translated copy of the grounds of
detention in hindi language. therefore it was urged that there was noncompliance with the
provisions of the act.
it will be appropriate to deal with the first ground. whether the grounds should have been
communicated in the language under stood by the detenus ? the constitution requires that the
grounds must be communicated. therefore it must follow as an imperative that the grounds must be
communicated in a language understood by the person concerned so that he can make effective
representation. here the definite case of the petitioner's father is that he does not understand
english or hindi or malayalam and does under stand only gujrati language. the facts revealed that
the detenu venilal was constantly accompanied and was in the company of his daughter as well as
son both of them knew english very well. the father signed a document in gujrati which was written
in english which is his mercy petition in which he completely accepted the guilt of the involvement
in smuggling. that document dated 30th june , 1984 contained , inter alia , a statement "i myself
am surprised to understand what prompted me to involve in such activity as dealing in imported
gold". he further asked for mercy. there is no rule of law that common sense should be put in cold
storage while considering constitutional provisions for safeguards against misuse of powers by
authorities though these constitutional provisions should be strictly construed. bearing this salutary
principle in mind and having regard to the conduct of the detenu venilal mehta specially in the
mercy petition and other communications , the version of the detenu venilal is feigning lack of any
knowledge of english must be judged in the proper perspective. he was , however , in any event
given by 30th june , 1984 the hindi translation of the grounds of which he claimed ignorance. the
gist of the annexures which were given in malayalam language had been stated in the grounds. that
he does not know anything except gujrati is merely the ipse dixit of venilal mehta and is not the last
word and the court is not denuded to its powers to examine the truth. he goes to the extent that he
signed the mercy petition not knowing the contents , not understanding the same merely because
his wife sent it though he was sixty years old and he was in business and he was writing at a time
when he was under arrest , his room had been searched , gold biscuits had been recovered from him.
court is not the place where one can sell all tales. the detaining authority came to the conclusion
that he knew both hindi and english. it has been stated so in the affidavit filed on behalf of the
respondent. we are of the opinion that the detenu venilal mehta was merely feigning ignorance of
english.
we may here notice the first decision upon which reliance was placed a decision in the case of
harikisan v. the state of maharashtra & others.(l) this court reiterated that the provisions of
article 22 (5) of the constitution required that the grounds should be communicated to the detenu
as soon as may be and that he should be afforded the earliest opportunity of making a
representation against the order. this court reiterated that communication meant bringing home to
the detenu effective knowledge of the facts and the grounds on which the order was based. to aprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 18person who was not conversant with the english language , in order to satisfy the requirement of the
constitution , the detenu must be given grounds in a language which he can understand and in a
script which he can read , if he is a literate person , in that case it was held that mere oral translation
at the time of the service was not enough. in that case the detenu was served with the order of
detention and the grounds in english. he did not know the language and asked for a translation in
hindi. the request was refused on the ground that the grounds had been orally translated to him at
the time these were served upon him and that english was still being the official language ,
communication of the order and grounds in english was in accordance with the law and the
constitution. this court observed at pages 925- 926 of the report as follows:-
"if the detained person is conversant with the english language , he will naturally be
in a position to understand the gravamen of the charge against him and the facts and
circumstances on which the order of detention is based. but to a person who is not so
conversant with the english language , in order to satisfy the requirements of the
constitution , the detenu must be given the grounds in a language which he can
understand , and in a script which (1).[1982] 2 supp. s.c.r. 918.
he can read , if he is a literate person.
the constitution has guaranteed freedom of movement throughout the territory of india and has
laid down detailed rules as to arrest and detention. it has also , by way of limitations upon the
freedom of personal liberty , recognised the right of the state to legislate for preventive detention ,
subject to certain safeguards in favour of the detained person , as laid down in cls.(4) & (5) of art. 22
one of those safeguards is that the detained person has the right to be communicated the grounds
on which the order of detention has been made against him , in order that he may be able to make
his representation against the order of detention. in our opinion , in the circumstances of this case ,
it has not been shown that the appellant had the opportunity , which the law contemplates in his
favour , making an effective representation against his detention. on this ground alone , we declare
his (i detention illegal , and set aside the order of the high court and the order of detention passed
against him."
the principle is well-settled. but in this case it has to be borne in mind that the grounds were given
on 25th june , 1984 following the search and seizure of gold biscuits from his room in the hotel in
his presence and in the background of the mercy petition as we have indicated and he was in
constant touch with his daughter and sons and there is no evidence that these people did not know
hindi or english. indeed they knew english as well as hindi. it is difficult to accept the position that
in the peculiar facts of this case the grounds were not communicated in the sense the grounds of
detention were not conveyed to the detenu venilal. whether grounds were communicated or not
depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
as early as in 1968 , in the case of hadibandhu dase v. district magistrate , cuttack & anr.(1) this
court was concerned with a case where on december 15 , 1967 , the district magistrate , cuttack had
served an order made in exercise of power under section 3(1) (a) (ii) of the preventive detention act
directing that (2) [1969] 1 s.c.r. 227.prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 19appellant be detained on various grounds. on december 19 , 1967 , the appellant filed a petition in
the high court challenging the order of detention on the grounds , inter alia , that the order and the
grounds in support thereof served upon the appellant were written in the english language which
the appellant did not understand. on january 18 , 1968 the district magistrate supplied 1 to the
appellant an oriya translation of the order and the grounds. on january 28 , 1968 , the state of
orissa revoked the order and issued a fresh order of detention.a translation of this order in oriya
was supplied to the appellant. the appellant thereafter submitted a supplementary petition
challenging the validity of the order dated january 28 , 1968. the high court of orissa rejected the
petition filed by the appellant. there was an appeal to this court by certificate. it was held that in
the facts of that case , there was no proper communication. the order ran into fourteen typed pages.
mere oral explanation of such an order without supplying him a translation in a script or language
which he understood , amounted to denial of the right of being communicated the grounds and of
being afforded the opportunity of making a representation against the order. the facts in the instant
case as mentioned hereinbefore are different.
in the case of nainmal partap mal shah v. union of india and others (1) , the detenu not conversant
with the english language was not supplied with the translated script. it was stated in opposition
that the grounds were explained to the detenu by the prison authorities. this court found that who
explained it was not stated. this explanation was not correct and as such there is no proper
communication. this does not help us in the facts of this case.
it is submitted in the instant case before us that the accompanying documents were supplied to the
detenu in hindi on 30th june , 1984 beyond a period of five days. for this there were no exceptional
circumstances nor any reason had been recorded. reliance was placed on certain observations in the
case of ibrahim ahmad batti v. state of gujarat & others. (2) but again the facts of that case were
entirely different because in the instant case all the (1)[1980] 4 s.c.c. 427.
(2)[19831 1 s.c.r. 540.
factors were pointed out in the grounds in english which venilal understood. his mercy petition
corroborates that view. there is no dispute that the other two detenus namely pragna mehta and
bharat mehta knew english and hindi. indeed no point of non communication of the grounds was
made out in respect of them.
it was next submitted that the detenus had retracted the alleged statements by letters dated 5th may
and 6th may , 1984 addressed to the collector , central excise and customs. while the statements
made in the confession or statements before the collector under section 108 had been noted in the
grounds of detention , the retraction had not been noted. it was submitted that the said retraction
was bound to influence the mind of the detaining authority one way or the other whether to make or
not to make the detention order and therefore not taking this fact into consideration on or about
19th/20th june , 1984 , there was no application of mind. it is true that retraction was not taken into
consideration as it is evident from the order of detention , thought the retraction as noted here in
before , was considered before confirming the order of detention subsequently after the opinion of
the advisory board.prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 20section 5a of the said act which was introduced by amendment in 1975 reads as follows:
'5a. grounds of detention severable-where a person has been detained in pursuance
of an order of detention under sub-section (1) of section 3 which has been made on
two or more grounds , such order of detention shall be deemed to have been made
separately on each of such grounds and accordingly-
(a) such order shall not be deemed to be invalid or inoperative merely because one or
some of the grounds is or are-
(i) vague ,
(ii) non-existent ,
(iii) not relevant , (iv) not connected or not proximately connected with such person ,
or (v) invalid for any other reason whatsoever , and it is not therefore possible to
hold that the government or officer making such order would have been satisfied as
provided in sub-section (l) of section 3 with reference to the remaining ground or
grounds and made the order of detention;
(b) the government or officer making the order of detention shall be deemed to have
made the order of detention under the said sub-section ( i ) after being satisfied as
provided in ground or that sub-section with reference to the remaining grounds."
section 5a stipulates that when the detention order has been made on two or more grounds , 'such
order of detention shall be deemed to have been made separately on each of such grounds and
accordingly that if one irrelevant or one inadmissible ground had been taken into consideration that
would not make the detention order bad.
article 22 (5) of the constitution has two elements: (i) communication of the grounds on which the
order of detention has been made; (ii) opportunity of making a representation against the order of
detention. communication of the grounds pre-supposes the formulation of the grounds and
formulation of the grounds requires and ensures the application of the mind of the detaining
authority to the facts and materials before it , that is to say , to pertinent and proximate matters in
regard to each individual case and excludes the elements of arbitrariness and automatism.
the 'grounds' under article 22(5) of the constitution do not mean mere factual inferences but mean
mere factual inferences plus factual material which led to such factual inferences. see the
observations of this court in the case of smt. shalini soni etc v. union of india- & ors. etc.(1) as
has been said by benjamin cardozo , "a constitution states or ought to state not rules for the
passing hour , but principles for an expanding future". the concept of "grounds" , has to therefore ,
has to receive an interpretation which will keep it meaningfully in tune with the contemporary
notions of the realities of the society and the purpose of the act in question in the light of concepts
of liberty and fundamental freedoms guaranteed by article 19 (1) , 21 and 22 of the constitution.prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 21reviewing several decisions in the case of hasmukh s/o bhagwanti m. patel v. the state of gujarat
& others. , (2) this court held that a democratic constitution is not to be interpreted merely from a
lexicographer's angle but with a realisation that it is an embodiment of the living thoughts and
aspirations of a free people. the concept of 'grounds' used in the context of detention in article
22(5) of the constitution and in sub-section (3) of section 3 of coffposa , therefore , has to receive
an interpretation which will keep it meaningfully in tune with a contemporary notions. while the
expression "grounds'' for that matters includes not only conclusions of fact but also all the "basic
facts" on which those conclusions were founded , they are different from subsidiary facts or further
particulars or the basic facts.
in the instant case , the ground of detention is the satisfaction of the detaining authority that with a
view to preventing the detenu from acting in any manner prejudicial to the conservation or
augmentation of foreign exchange or with a view to preventing the detenu from , inter alia , dealing
in smuggled goods otherwise than by engaging in transporting or concealing or keeping the
smuggled goods , or engaging in transporting or concealing or keeping smuggled goods the
detention of the detenu is necessary. this satisfaction was arrived at as inferences from several
factors. these have been separately mentioned. one of them is the contention but this ground was
taken into consideration without taking note of the retraction made thereafter. but the inference of
the satisfaction was drawn from several factors which have been enumerated before. we have to
examine whether even if the facts (1) [1981] s.c.r. 962.
(2) [1981] 1 s.c.r. 353.
stated in the confession are completely ignored , then the inferences can still be drawn from other
independent and objective facts mentioned in this case , namely the fact of seizure after search of 60
gold biscuits from the suitcase of the daughter in the presence of the father which indubitably
belonged to the father and admitted by him to belong to him for which no explanation has been
given and secondly the seizure of the papers connected with other groups and organisations pratap
sait and others to whom gold has been sold by the father are relevant grounds from which an
inference can reasonably be drawn for the satisfaction of the detaining authority for detaining the
detenu for the purpose of section 3(1) (iii) and 3(1) (iv). we are of the opinion that the impugned
order cannot be challenged merely by the rejection of the inference drawn from confession. the
same argument was presented in a little different shade namely the fact or retraction should have
been considered by the detaining authority and the court does not know that had that been taken
into consideration , what conclusion the detaining authority would have arrived at. this contention
cannot be accepted. we are not concerned with the sufficiency of the grounds. we are concerned
whether there are relevant materials on which a reasonable belief or conviction could have been
entertained by the detaining authority on the grounds mentioned in section 3(1) of the said act.
whether other ground should have been taken into consideration or not is not relevant at the stage
of the passing of the detention order. this contention , therefore , cannot be accepted. if that is the
position then in view of section 5a of the act there was sufficient material to sustain this ground of
detention.prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 22in the case of state of gujarat v. chamanlal manjibhai soni , (1) this court maintained the order of
the high court quashing the detention. this court observed that detention under section 3 of the
act was only for the purpose of preventing smuggling and all the grounds , whether there are one or
more , would be relatable only to various activities of smuggling and no other separate ground
which could deal with matters other than smuggling could be conceived of because the act of
smuggling covered several activities each forming a separate ground of detention and the act dealt
with no other act except smuggling. whenever allegations of (1) [l981] 2 s.c.r. 500.
the custody of the customs officers , his advocate addressed a letter and sent a telegram to them
protesting against his detention and illegal custody beyond 24 hours and also expressing an
apprehension that he was being detained with a view to obtain confessional statements under
duress. it was admitted that the advocate's request for permission to remain present at the time of
interrogation of the detenu was turned down by the customs officers. the advocate was also told
that the detenu would be produced before a magistrate on the day of request but that was not done.
he was produced on the following day and was remanded to judicial custody permitting further
interrogation while in judicial custody , the detenu refused to sign the further statements and
squarely resiled. while the detenu's application for bail was pending before the magistrate , the
respondent passed the impugned order. in petition under art. 226 of the constitution for the issue
of a writ of habeas corpus , the appellant contended that the order of the detaining authority was
liable to be set aside because full facts of the case were not intimated before the detention order was
passed , and therefore , there was complete non-application of mind of the detaining authority to the
attendant vital circumstances. it was held that the impugned order was invalid and illegal because
there was complete non-application of the mind of the detaining authority to the most material and
vital facts. in the instant case before us , there was no request for consultation with the advocate.
there is no case of non- production in spite of intimation by the advocate to the customs officers
before a magistrate. the confessional statements of course , were retracted. but in this case the
confessional statements was not the only fact upon which the detaining authority had passed an
order. in the premises even if the confessional statements which were retracted as such could not be
taken into consideration , there are other facts independent of the confessional statement as
mentioned hereinbefore which can reasonably lead to the satisfaction that the authorities have come
to.
the contention on behalf of the detenus that there was delay in serving the grounds upon the
detenus has been dealt with. there is no substance in the contention in view of what is stated
hereinbefore .
so far as the ground that the detenus were not allowed to be represented properly before the
advisory board? from the facts narrated in affidavit in opposition where it has been stated that
services of dr. s.c. purohit , senior scientist , v.s.s c. thumba , trivandrum and dr. mrs. purohit
were available to the detenu to translate the statements of the detenu to the advisory board. the
detenu was detained on 20th june , 1984. as required under section 8(3) of the act , the case of the
detenu was referred to the advisory board in government letter dated 18th july. 1984. the
representations submitted by the detenu were also forwarded to the advisory board for its
consideration. the services of the two persons mentioned here in before were utilised by the boardprakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 23in understanding the statement of the detenu and deciphreing the representation in gujarati
submitted by the detenu , venilal mehta to the state government which was also forwarded to the
board. therefore , it has cannot be said that detenus have not been given proper facility to be
represented before the advisory board. the contention that the fact that there was retraction of the
confession not having been taken into consideration had vitiated orders has been dealt with. the
allegation or the submission that the detaining authority did not independently consider the
representation of the detenu put mechanically followed the opinion of the advisory board cannot be
sustained in view of the facts and circumstances of this case.
in this case there was evidence before the authorities concerned that 60 gold biscuits of foreign
origin without any explanation of their importation were found in the possession of the father-that
is undisputed. venilal could not give any explanation of their being in there possession. these were
smuggled. secondly , there was evidence in view of the subsequent other facts independent of the
confessions of the father and the sons and the daughter that the father was in contact with persons
who were buying smuggled gold from him and buying at high prices. their telephone number were
found and they could be identified from the papers seized during the search at his hotel room the
detenu venilal made a mercy petition-
as the statement of objects and reasons of 1975 amending act state that smuggling of foreign
exchange racketeering and related activities have a deterious effect on the national economy and
thereby a serious adverse effect on the security of state. the society must be protected from that
social menace by immobilizing the persons by detention of the persons engaged in those operations
and to disrupt the machinery established for furthering smuggling and foreign exchange
manipulations (statement of objects and reasons of 1975 act). preventive detention unlike punitive
detention which is to punish for the wrong done , is to protect the society by preventing wrong being
done. though such powers must be very cautiously exercised not to undermine the fundamental
freedoms guaranteed to our people , the procedural safeguards are to ensure that yet these must be
looked at from a pragmatic and commonsense point of view. the exercise of the power of preventive
detention must be strictly within the safeguards provided. we are governed by the constitution and
our constitution embodies a particular philosophy of government and a way of life and that
necessarily requires understanding between those who exercise powers and the people over whom
or in respect of whom such power is exercised. the purpose of exercise of all such powers by the
government must be to promote common well-being and must be to sub-serve the common good. it
is necessary to be protect therefore the individual rights in so far as practicable which arc not
inconsistent with the security and well-being of the society. grant of power imposes limitation on
the use of the power. there are various procedural safeguards and we must construe those in proper
light and from pragmatic commonsense point of view. we must remember that observance of
written law about the procedural safeguards for the protection of the individual is normally the high
duty of public official but in all circumstances not the highest. the law of self preservation and
protection of the country and national security may claim in certain circumstances higher priority.
as has bean said by thomas jefferson "to lose our country by a scrupulous adherence to written law
, would be to lose itself , with life , liberty , property and all those who are enjoying them with us ,
thus absurdly sacrificing the end to the means" (thomas jefferson , writings (washington ed) , v.prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 24542-545 and the constitution between friends by loutis fisher 47). by the aforesaid approach both
justice and power can by brought together and whatever is just may be powerful and whatever may
by powerful may be just in the background of the facts and circumstances of this case the procedural
safeguards have been complied with as far as practicable. there are no merits in the fancied
grievances of the detenus. in that view of the matter , these petitions fail and are accordingly
dismissed.
 a.p.j.                                 petitions dismissed.prakash chandra mehta vs commissioner and secretary ... on 12 april, 1985
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/208589/ 25