supreme court of india
bungo steel furniture pvt. ltd vs union of india on 30 september, 1966
equivalent citations: 1967 air 378, 1967 scr (1) 633
author: v ramaswami
bench: ramaswami, v.
           petitioner:
bungo steel furniture pvt.  ltd.
        vs.
respondent:
union of india
date of judgment:
30/09/1966
bench:
ramaswami, v.
bench:
ramaswami, v.
bhargava, vishishtha
dayal, raghubar
citation:
 1967 air  378            1967 scr  (1) 633
 citator info :
 rf         1976 sc 425  (13)
 d          1988 sc1166  (7)
 r          1990 sc1426  (22)
act:
arbitration-award-party  contracting  to  obtain  supply  of
steel  bins-cancellation  of  contract  after  part  supply-
arbitrator awarding damages for wrongful termination-reasons
or principles not indicated in award- if could be set  aside
on ground of error of law on face of the award.
headnote:
the  union of india entered into two contracts  in  november
1944   and  june  1945  with  the  appellants,  which   were
subsequently  modified in february 1946, for the  supply  of
4,700  bins  at  an agreed price inclusive of  the  cost  of
steel.  the government undertook to make available the steel
required  for the manufacture of the bins and  accordingly,,
supplied to the appellants steel valued at rs. 2,53,521  for
which  amount  credit  was to be given  to  the  government.
after  2,172 bins had been manufactured and supplied to  the
union,  the latter cancelled the contract for the supply  of
the balance 2,528 bins.bungo steel furniture pvt. ltd vs union of india on 30 september, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/263196/ 1each  of  the  contracts between the  parties  contained  an
arbitration  clause and in accordance with  this  provision,
the dispute arising out of cancellation of the contracts was
referred  to an arbitrator.  the arbitrator found  that  the
contract had been wrongfully cancelled; and that at the time
of the cancellation the component parts of the balance 2,528
bins  were  ready but had not been assembled  into  finished
bins.   by way of compensation for the wrongful  termination
of  the contract by the government, the  arbitrator  awarded
damages to the company of the amount representing the  value
of  steel  used up in making the component  parts  for  bins
which  had  not been assembled into  completed  bins.   this
amounted to rs. 1,65,825.
the  government  made an application to  the  calcutta  high
court for setting aside the arbitrator's award on the ground
that there was a mistake of law apparent on the face of  the
award in the estimation of damages for wrongful  termination
of  the  contract.   a  single  judge  of  the  high   court
substantially confirmed the arbitrator's award.  the govern-
ment  took the matter in appeal to a division bench  of  the
high  court and the two appeals filed were allowed  by  that
bench and the award was set aside.
it  was contended on behalf of the appellants that the  high
court  could  not  have interfered with  the  award  of  the
arbitrator  as there was no error on the face of the  award;
that  the  arbitrator  was not bound to  give  -reasons  for
estimating  the damages to which the appellant was  entitled
and that he had not in fact given any such reasons.
held : allowing the appeal (per bhargava and raghubar dayal,
jj.).  the arbitrator in fixing the amount  of  compensation
had  not proceeded to follow any principles, the valdity  of
which  could  be tested on the basis of laws  applicable  to
breaches  of contract.  he awarded the compensation  to  the
extent  that he considered right in his  discretion  without
indicating  his reasons.  such a decision by  an  arbitrator
could not be held to be erroneous on the face of the record.
[642 a-b]
634
the  consideration that led the arbitrator to consider  that
the  value of the steel was equal to, and not more  or  less
than,  the amount which he considered it right to  award  as
compensation,  was not indicated by him in his award.   this
was, therefore, clearly a case where the arbitrator came  to
the conclusion that a certain amount, should be paid by  the
government  as compensation for wrongful termination of  the
contract, and in his discretion-he laid down that the amount
should  be  equal to the value of the steel  as  it  existed
after it had been converted into component parts. [641 f-g]
it is now a well settled principle that if an arbitrator, in
deciding  a dispute before him, does not record his  reasons
and does not indicate the principles of law on which he  has
proceeded, the award is not on that account vitiated.  it is
only when the arbitrator proceeds to give his reasons or  tobungo steel furniture pvt. ltd vs union of india on 30 september, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/263196/ 2lay down principles on which he has arrived at his decisions
that the court is competent   to  examine  whether  he   has
proceeded contrary to law and is entitled    to interfere if
such  error  in  law is apparent on the face  of  the  award
itself. [640 h]
(per  ramaswami  j.,  dissenting)-in the  present  case  the
arbitrator   had  estimated  the  measure  of   damages   as
equivalent  to  the  value of steel used up  in  making  the
component parts.  that was the legal proposition upon  which
he  had  based his award and the question was  whether  that
legal  proposition  was correct.  the arbitrator  had  found
that  the appellant had produced no evidence with regard  to
the  manufacturing cost of the component parts of the  2,528
unfinished  bins;  he  had therefore  failed  to  prove  the
resultant damage on account of the breach of contract.   but
if in spite of this finding the arbitrator decided to  award
damages to the appellant, the highest amount which he  could
award would be rs. 1,03,066, which is the difference between
the  contract  price and the value of the steel used  up  in
manufacturing  their  component  parts.   the  estimate   of
damages at this figure is based, on the assumption that  the
appellant  had manufactured completely 2,528 bins  according
to  the terms of the contract.  the arbitrator  had  ignored
the  provisions of s. 73 of the indian contract act and  had
awarded  damages  to the appellant on a wrong  legal  basis.
the award was therefore vitiated by an error of law apparent
on the face of it. [639 c, g, h] .
champsey bhara and co. v. jivraj balloo spinning and weaving
co. ltd. 50 i.a. 324 and james clark (brush materials)  ltd.
v.   -carters   (merchants)   ltd.  [1944]   1   k.b.   566,
distinguished.
judgment:
civil appellate jurisdiction : civil appeals nos. 754 and 755 of 1964.
appeals from the judgment and order dated august 1, 1962 of the calcutta high court in appeals
nos. 13 and 131 of 1961 respectively.
a. k. sen, uma mehta, p. k. chatterjee and p. k. bose, for the appellant (in both the appeals).
n. s. bindra and r. n. sachthey, for the respondent (in both he appeals).
the judgment of bhargava and raghubar dayal j.j was delivered by bhargava j.
ramaswami j. delivered a dissenting opinion.
ramaswamy, j. these appeals are brought by certificate' from the judgment of the calcutta high
court dated august 1, 1962 by which an award of the arbitrator, sir r. c. mitter dated september 2,bungo steel furniture pvt. ltd vs union of india on 30 september, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/263196/ 31959 was set aside.
the disputes arise out of two contracts being a. t. 1000 dated november 30, 1944 and a. t. 1048
dated june 25, 1945 between the government of india (hereinafter called the "government") and
the bungo steel furniture pvt. ltd. (hereinafter called the "appellant"). both the contracts contained
the usual arbitration clause embodied in cl. 21 of the general conditions of contract in form no.
w.s.b. 133 for reference of any question or dispute arising in connection with the contract or arising
under the condition thereof. the claims and the counterclaims of the parties under the two contracts
were referred to the arbitration of sir r. c. mitter. the award of the arbitrator is dated september 2,
1959. the arbitrator found that the contract no. a. t. 1000 was for the supply of 4700 bins at rs.
107/2/6 per bin inclusive of the price of steel. in respect of the supply of bins under this contract the
government agreed to pay an extra rs. 4/12/6 per bin for extra partition. the contract no. a. t.
1048 was for the supply of 2000 steel bins at rs. 132/8/- per bin inclusive of the price of steel. the
arbitrator found that on february 20, 1946 the parties agreed to a modification of the contracts and
the agreed modification was that the supply under contract no a. t. 1000 would be reduced to 1805
bins and the supply under contract no. a. t. 1048 would be reduced to 367 bins, so that the total
supply under the two contracts would be 4700 bins. the arbitrator further found that only 1805 bins
had been manufactured under contract no. 1000 and 367 bins had been manufactured under
contract no. 1048 and that in all 2172 bins were manufactured by the appellant and were accepted
by the government and the appellant was en- titled to the price of 2172 bins so supplied inclusive of
the price of steel amounting to rs. 2,42,044/-. the arbitrator held that the government wrongfully
cancelled the contract with respect to the balance 2528 bins and that at the time of this cancellation
the component parts of the balance 2528 bins had not been assembled into finished bins. the
arbitrator found that the appellant was entitled to a credit for the sum of rs. 10,385/- on account of
the cost of supply of the extra partitions for 2172 bins. this finding of the arbitrator was held to be
erroneous by mallick, j. who reduced the amount awarded to the appellant by a sum of rs. 10,385/-.
the finding of mallick, j. was not challenged by the appellant before the division bench of the high
court. the arbitrator also found that the appellant was entitled to credit for the sum of rs.
27,969/on account of payment made by the appellant towards the cost of steel on m.r.o. and that
the government was entitled to a cross credit for a sum of rs. 7,851/- on account of payment made
by it to the appellant directly. these two findings of the arbitrator were not challenged before the
division bench. the arbitrator found that the government was under an obligation to supply steel
for the manufacture of the bins and that it did supply such steel to the appellant. the arbitrator
disbelieved the appellant's case that it had rejected the steel sheets supplied by the government and
had used the steel sheets from their own stocks and that the steel sheets supplied by the
government became rusted and were still lying in their factory grounds as powdered rust. the
arbitrator found : (a) that the price of the total quantity of steel supplied by the government to the
appellant at basic rates was rs. 2,53,521/-, (b) that the price of the steel used for making 2172
finished bins amounted to rs. 87,696/- and the government was entitled to credit for this sum of
money, and (c) that no surplus steel was left after manufacture of 2172 finished bins and the
component parts of the unfinished bins. it followed from this finding that the price of steel used up
in making the component parts of the unfinished bins amounted to rs. 1,65,825/-.bungo steel furniture pvt. ltd vs union of india on 30 september, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/263196/ 4the arbitrator found that the appellant was entitled to com- pensation for the wrongful cancellation
of the balance 2528 bins. his findings in the award read as follows :- "i further hold that the
cancellation by government for the balance was wrongful. there is however no evidence relating to
the manufacturing cost of the aforesaid remaining component parts. by way of compensation for the
wrongful termination of the contract by government as aforesaid i give the company the amount
representing the value of the steel used up in making the said component parts which had not been
assembled into completed bins. i therefore do not allow the government credit for the value of the
steel used up in manufacturing those component parts." the government made an application to
the calcutta high court for setting aside the award of sir r. c. mitter on the ground that the
arbitrator had failed to apply his mind and there was a mistake of law apparent on the face of the
award in the estimation of damages for wrongful termination of the contract. mallick, j. made a
minor modification in the award with regard to a sum of rs. 10,385/- and on july 27, 1960 the
learned judge pronounced his judgment in terms of the modified award. the government look the
matter in appeal before the division bench of the high court, appeals nos. 13 and 131 of 1961. these
appeals were allowed by bachawat and laik, jj. who set a-side the award of the arbitrator in respect
of the two contracts.
on behalf of the appellant mr. a. k. sen put forward the argument that there was no error on the
face of the award and the high court exceeded its jurisdiction in setting aside the award of the
arbitrator. it was contended that the arbitrator is not bound to give reasons for estimating the
damages to which the appellant was entitled. it was stated that the estimate of the: arbitrator may
be arbitrary but he was not bound to give reasons for the estimate reached by him 'and that it is not
open to the court lo speculate, when no reasons are given by the arbitrator, as to what impelled the
arbitrator to arrive at his conclusion in support of this argument counsel for the appellant relied on
the following passage from the judgment of lord dunedin in champasey bhara and company v.
jivraj balloo spinning and weaving company ltd.(1):
"an error in law on the face of the award means, in their lordships' view, that you can find in the
award or a document actually incorporated thereto, as for instance a note appended by the
arbitrator stating the reasons for his judgment, some legal proposition which is the basis of the
award and which you can then say is erroneous. it does not mean that if in narrative a reference is
made to a contention of one party, that opens the door to, seeing first what that contention is, and
then going to the con- tract on which the parties' rights depend to see if that contention is sound."
it is true that the court in dealing with an application to set aside an award has not to consider
whether the view of the arbitrator on the evidence is justified. the arbitrator's adjudication is
generally considered binding between the parties, for he is a tribunal elected by the parties and the
power of the court to set aside the award is restricted to 'cases set out in s. 30 of the arbitration act.
an award may be set aside by the court on the ground of an error of law apparent on the face of the
award but an award is not invalid merely because by a process of inference and argument it may be
demonstrated that the arbitrator has committed some mistake in arriving at his conclusion. mr. a.
k. sen on behalf of the appellant also, referred to the decision of tucker, j. in james clark (brush
materials) ltd. v. carters (merchants), ltd. (2) wherein it is pointed out that in determiningbungo steel furniture pvt. ltd vs union of india on 30 september, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/263196/ 5whether the award of an arbitrator should be remitted or set aside on the ground that there is an
error of law appearing on the face of it, the court is not entitled to draw any inference as to the
finding by the arbitrator of facts supporting the award, but must take it at its face (1) 50 1. a. 324,
331.
(2) [1944] 1 k.b. 566.
value. in my opinion,, the principle laid down by the judicial committee in champsey bhara and
company v. jivaraj balloo spinning and weaving company ltd.(') and by tucker, j. in james -clark
(brush materials), ltd. v. carters (merchants), ltd.(2) has no application in the present case, for the
arbitrator in the present case has expressly stated the reasons for the estimate of damages -to which
the appellant was entitled for the breach of the contract. the claim of the appellant is stated by the
arbitrator in the award -as follows :
"the company claims the price of 2528 bins by way of damages for the wrongful cancellation of the
contract." section 73 of the indian contract act provides for the measure of compensation for loss or
damage caused by breach of the contract. section 73 states :
"73. when a contract has been broken, the party who suffers by such breach is entitled to receive,
from the party who has broken the contract, compensation for any loss or damage caused to him
thereby, which naturally arose in the usual course of things from such breach, or which the parties
knew, when they made the contract, to be likely to result from the breach of it.
such compensation is not to be given for any remote and indirect loss or damage sustained by
reason of the breach. explanation.-in estimating the loss or damage arising from a breach of
contract, the means which existed of remedying the inconvenience caused by the non-performance
of the contract must be taken into account."
section 55 of the sale of goods act deals with suits for breach -of the contract where the buyer
refuses to pay for the goods -according to the terms of the contract. section 55 states :
"55. (1) where under a contract of sale the property in the goods has passed to the buyer and the
buyer wrongfully neglects or refuses to pay for the goods according to the terms of the contract, the
seller may sue him for the price of the goods.
(2)where under a contract of sale the price is payable on a day certain irrespective of delivery and
the buyer wrongfully neglects or refuses to pay such price, the seller may sue him for the price
although the property in the goods has not passed and the goods have not been appropriated to the
contract."
(1) 50 i.a. 324.
(2) [1944] 1. k.b. 566.bungo steel furniture pvt. ltd vs union of india on 30 september, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/263196/ 6this section does not apply to the present case because the bins were not manufactured and the
property could not have passed to the government. but the appellant was entitled to claim damages
for the wrongful cancellation of the balance 2528 bins by the government and for non acceptance of
the 2528 bins under s. 56 of the indian sale of goods act which provides :
"56. where the buyer wrongfully neglects or refuses to accept and pay for the goods, the seller may
sue him for damages for non-acceptance."
in the present case, the arbitrator has estimated the measure of damages as equivalent to the value
of the steel used up in making the component parts. that is the legal proposition upon which the
arbitrator has based his award and the question is whether that legal proposition is correct. now the
amount representing the value of the steel used up in making the component parts of the unfinished
2528 bins could not be the true measure of damages for their non- acceptance. the normal rule for
computing the damages for non-acceptance of 2528 unfinished bins would be the difference
between the contract price and the market price of such goods at the time when the contract is
broken. if there is no available market at the place of delivery, the market price of the nearest place
or the price prevailing in the controlling market may be taken into consideration. it was argued for
the appellant that this rule may not apply because the bins were not completely fabricated, but, in
that case the measure of damages would be the difference between the contract price on the one
hand, and the cost of labour and material required for the manufacture of the component parts of
the 2528 unfinished bins on the other. in this case, the arbitrator found that the appellant produced
no evidence with regard to the manufacturing cost of the component parts of the 2528 unfinished
bins. in other words, the appellant failed to prove the resultant damage on account of breach of
contract, but if in spite of this finding the arbitrator decided to award damages to the appellant the
highest amount which he could award for non- acceptance would be rs. 1,03,066/- which is the
difference between the contract price at rs. 107/2/6 per bin including the price for extra partition
amounting to rs. 2,68,891 /and the value of the steel used up in manufacturing their compo- nent
parts amounting to rs. 1,65,825/-. the estimate of damages at this figure is based on the
assumption that the appellant had manufactured completely 2528 bins according to the terms of the
contract. it is therefore manifest that on no conceivable legal basis whatever could the arbitrator
pronounce an award for a sum of rs. 1,65,825/- which represents the value of the steel used up in
making the component parts as the compensation to be awarded to the appellant. in other words,
the arbitrator has ignored the provisions of s. 73 of the indian contract act and has awarded
damages to the appellant on a wrong legal basis. the award of the arbitrator therefore is vitiated by
an error of law apparent on the face of it.
for these reasons i hold that the judgment of the division bench of the high court dated august 1,
1962 is right and these appeals must be dismissed with costs. bhargava, j. the facts in these two
appeals have been given in the judgment of ramaswami, j., and hence, they need not be repeated by
us. the award was set aside by the high court, in appeal from the judgment of the learned single
judge passing a decree on its basis, on the ground that the award of the umpire with regard to the
compensation for the wrongful cancellation of the contract was erroneous in law and the error
appeared on the face of the award. in the award, the arbitrator held that under contract no. a. t.
1000, only 1805 bins had been manufactured and under the second contract no. a. t. 1048, 367bungo steel furniture pvt. ltd vs union of india on 30 september, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/263196/ 7bins had been manufactured. these bins were accepted and the remaining component parts had not
been assembled into more finished bins by the time when the contract was cancelled. he further
held that the cancellation by the government for the balance was wrongful. there was, however, no
evidence relating to the manufacturing cost of the aforesaid remaining component parts.
thereupon, he proceeded to award, by way of compensation for the wrongful termination of the
contract by the government as aforesaid, to the company the amount representing the value of the
steel used up in making the said component parts which had not been assembled into completed
bins, and, therefore, he did not allow the government credit for the value of the steel used up in
manufacturing those component parts. he further held that after manufacturing the finished bins
and component parts and unfinished bins, no surplus steel was left. the high court, in setting aside
the award, was of the view, that in this part dealing with compensation payable by the government
to the appellant, the learned umpire had acted contrary to the principles recognised in law for
assessing compensation. in our view, considering the principles which apply to the exercise of the
power of a court to set aside an award of an arbitrator, this order by the high court was not
justified.
it is now a well-settled principle that if an arbitrator, in deciding a dispute before him, does not
record his reasons and does not indicate the principles of law on which he has proceeded, the award
is not on that account vitiated. it is only when the arbitrator proceeds to give his reasons or to lay
down principles on which he has arrived at his decisions that the court is competent to examine
whether he has proceeded contrary to law and is entitled to interfere if such error in law is apparent
on the face of the award itself.
in the present case, the umpire held that the cancellation of the contract by the government for the
balance of the bins was wrongful. he was, therefore, fully entitled to award compensation for that
breach of contract to the appellant. he, however, found that there was no evidence relating to the
manufacturing cost of the aforesaid. remaining component parts which, on principles applicable to
breaches of contract, would ordinarily have been the amount awarded as compensation. having no
such evidence, the umpire, it appears, proceeded to use his discretion to determine the
compensation which he thought should be equit- ably made payable by the government to the
appellant. he had already arrived at the finding that the steel supplied by the government, which
had not been used up in completed bins, had already been consumed in making component parts. in
these circumstances, having decided that compensation should be paid by the government to the
appellant, he fixed the amount of compensation at the value represented by the steel used up in
making those component parts. this award is not to be interpreted as proceeding on any basis that
the value of the steel used up in making the component parts was held by him on some principle to
be the compensation payable by the government. what he actually meant was that having mentally
decided on the amount that was to be awarded as compensation, he came to the view that that
amount can equitably be treated as being equal to the value of the steel used up in making the
component parts. what the value of that steel in the component parts was at that stage was not
computed by him. may be, the steel had become less serviceable and deteriorated in value. what
was the consideration that led him to consider that the value of the steel was equal to, and not more
or less than, the amount which he considered it right to award as compensation, was not indicated
by him in his award. this is, therefore, clearly a case where the arbitrator came to the conclusionbungo steel furniture pvt. ltd vs union of india on 30 september, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/263196/ 8that a certain amount should be paid by the government as compensation for wrongful termination
of the contract, and in his discretion, he laid down that that amount is equal to the value of the steel
as it existed after it had been con- verted into component parts. he did not hold that the
government was not entitled to the return of the unused steel. what he actually held was that the
government being entitled to the value of the unused steel, no separate direction in respect of it
need be made, because the value of that steel was equal to the amount of compensation which he
was awarding to the appellant; and thus, the two liabilities of the appellant to the government and
of the government to the appellant were set off against each other. in the circumstances, it has to be
held that the umpire, in fixing the amount of compensation, had not proceeded to follow any
principles, the validity of which could be tested on the basis of laws applicable to breaches of
contract. he awarded the compensation to the extent that he considered right in his discretion
without indicating his reasons. such a decision by an umpire or an arbitrator cannot be held to be
erroneous on the face of the record. we, therefore, allow the appeals with .costs, set aside the
appellant order of the high court, and restore that of the learned single judge.
order in view of the majority judgment, the appeals are allowed with ,costs, the appellate order of
the high court is set aside and that -of the learned single judge, is restored. r.k.p.s.bungo steel furniture pvt. ltd vs union of india on 30 september, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/263196/ 9