supreme court of india
commissioner of income tax west ... vs anwar ali on 29 april, 1970
equivalent citations: 1970 air 1782, 1971 scr (1) 446
author: a grover
bench: grover, a.n.
           petitioner:
commissioner of income tax west bengal
        vs.
respondent:
anwar ali
date of judgment:
29/04/1970
bench:
grover, a.n.
bench:
grover, a.n.
shah, j.c.
hegde, k.s.
citation:
 1970 air 1782            1971 scr  (1) 446
 1970 scc  (2) 185
 citator info :
 f          1972 sc 132  (18)
 d          1973 sc  22  (13)
 rf         1977 sc2194  (2)
 rf         1980 sc1146  (7)
 rf         1992 sc 591  (2)
act:
income-tax  act  (11 of 1922),  s.  28-penalty  proceedings-
whether of a criminal nature-onus on department show  amount
concealed as income.
headnote:
the  income-tax officer, while assessing the  respondent  to
tax   discovered   an  undisclosed  bank  account   of   the
'respondent  for  a  large  sum.   he  did  not  accept  the
explanation of the respondent as to the source of the amount
and  held  that it represented income  from  an  undisclosed
source.   thereafter he initiated penalty proceedings  under
s.  28  and  imposed a penalty which was  confirmed  by  the
appellate  assistant commissioner.  in appeal, the  tribunal
held that penalty proceedings were of a criminal nature  and
that  the  burden  lay on the department to  show  that  thecommissioner of income tax west ... vs anwar ali on 29 april, 1970
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1629738/ 1amount concealed was of a revenue nature and was  assessable
as  income  and  that the onus was  not  discharged  in  the
present   case  by  merely  showing  that   the   assessee's
explanation was not accepted in the assessment  proceedings.
the high court agreed with the tribunal.
in appeal to this court,
held. (1) penalty proceedings are included in the expression
"assessment"  and  the  true  nature of  a  penalty  is  the
imposition of an additional tax.  but, one of the  principal
objects  of  s.  28   is  to  provide  a  deterrent   against
recurrence  of default on the part of the assessee.   there-
fore,  the section is a penal provision and the  proceedings
were of a penal nature. [450 b-c]
c.   a. abraham v. income-tax officer, 41 i.t.r. 425 (s.c.),
explained. commissioner of income-tax, ahmedabad v. gokuldas
harivallabhdas
34 i.t.r. 98,  commissioner of income-tax gujarat v.  l.  h.
vora, 56 i.t.r. 126 and commissioner of income tax bihar and
orissa v. mohan mallah, 54    i.t.r. 499, approved.
moman     rain  ram  kumar v.  commissioner  of  income-tax,
u.p., 59 i.t.r. 135 and lal chand gopal das v.  commissioner
of income-tax, u.p., 48 i.t.r. 324, not approved.
hindustan  steel  ltd. v. state of orissa, c.as.  nos.  883-
892/66  dt.  4-8-1969 and fattorini  (thomas)  (lanchashire)
ltd.  v.  inland revenue commissioner,  (1943)  (11)  i.t.r.
supp. 50, referred to.
(2)the  gist  of the offence under s. 28(1)(c) is  that  the
assessee  has  concealed the particulars of  his  income  or
deliberately   furnished  inaccurate  particulars  of   such
income,  and therefore, the department must  establish  that
the  receipt of the amount in dispute constitutes income  of
the assessee.  if there is no evidence on the record  except
the  explanation  has been found to be false,  if  does  not
follow that the receipt constitutes his taxable income. [450
e-g]
                            447
commissioner    of,   income-tax,    ahmedabad    v.gokuldas
harivallabhdas, 34 i.t.r. 98, approved.
(3)'since the proceedings under s. 28 are of a penal  nature
and  the  burden  is  on the  department  to  prove  that  a
particular amount is a revenue receipt, the finding given in
the  assessment proceedings that the assessee's  explanation
is  false and that the disputed amount represents income  is
evidence  but  is not conclusive.  before penalty  could  be
imposed the, entirety of circumstances must reasonably point
to  the  conclusion  that the  disputed  amount  represented
income  and that the assesses , had  consciously.  concealed
the particulars of his income or had deliberately  furnished
inaccurate particulars. [450-451 a-c]
judgment:commissioner of income tax west ... vs anwar ali on 29 april, 1970
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1629738/ 2civil appellate jurisdiction: civil appeal no. 2560 of 1966. appeal from the judgment and
order dated may 11, 1966 of the calcutta high court in income-tax matter no. 98 of 1962. s. t.
desai, g. c. sharma and r. n. sachthey, for the appellants.
d. k. de, a. n. sinha, rathin das for p. k. mukherjee, for respondent.
the judgment of the court was delivered by grover, j. this is an appeal by special leave from a
judg- ment of the calcutta high court answering the following question which was referred to it by
the tribunal in the negative and in favour of the assessee.
"whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the income-tax
authorities were justified in imposing a penalty on the assessee under section, 28 (1)
(c) of the income-tax act ?"
the assessee during the assessment year 1947-48, the corresponding- previous year being the
financial year ending on march 31, 947 was a partner in the firm of m/s. haji sk. md. hussain md.
jan of calcutta. the income-tax officer while making the assessment discovered an undisclosed
bank account of the assessee with the central bank of india ltd. bettiah, bihar. it was found that a
cash-deposit of rs. 87,000 had been made by the assessee on november 21, 1946 in that bank. he
was asked to explain the source, of the amount of deposit. according to his explanation all his
relations got panicky during the communal riots in bihar in the year 1946 and entrusted him with
whatever cash amounts they had with them at that time for safe custody.
it was stated that a sum of rs. 87,000 had been received in the following manner zahir hussain
alias md. zahir (cousin)rs. 18,500/- mohammad jan (deceased father)rs. 1,000 mohd. haniff
(cousin) rs.1,750 khairunnessa bibi (mother)rs.23,000 safihan bibi (sister) rs.13,000 fatema
bibi (wife) rs.15,750 hasuia bibi (brother's wife)rs.12,000 ___________ rs.87,000
____________ these amounts which were received by the assessee from his relations were
deposited by him in a fixed deposit account in the joint name of himself and his minor sons in the
bank at bettiah. the income-tax officer did not accept the explanation of the assessee and held that
the sum of rs. 87,000 represented income from undisclosed sources. he added the amount to the
total income of the assessee in his personal assessment. this addition was maintained by the
appellate assistant commissioner in appeal. the appellate tribunal also agreed with the decision of
,the income-tax officer and the appellate assistant commissioner. penalty proceedings were
initiated after the assessment and in due course the income-tax officer imposed a penalty
amounting to rs. 66,000 on the assessee under s. 28 (1) (c) for concealing income and deliberately
furnishing inaccurate particulars. the appellate assistant commissioner in appeal held that the
case clearly called for a penal action but he reduced the amount of penalty by rs. 22,000.
subsequently he rectified his order under s. 35 and confirmed the penalty of rs. 66,000 imposed by
the income-tax officer. the assessee went up to the appellate tribunal in appeal. the tribunal took
the view that penalty proceedings were of a criminal nature. the onus lay on the department to
show by adequate evidence that the amount of the cash stated to have been concealed by the
assessee was of a revenue nature and was assessable as income and that the assessee had concealed
it or deliberately furnished false particulars in regard thereto. this onus, in the opinion of thecommissioner of income tax west ... vs anwar ali on 29 april, 1970
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1629738/ 3tribunal, was not ,discharged by the income-tax authorities by showing merely that the explanation
given by the assessee in the assessment proceedings was found to be unacceptable. the income-tax
officer, according to the tribunal, must find some material apart from he falsity of the assessee's
explanation to support his finding that the receipt from undisclosed sources was income. as no
satisfactory evidence had been produced by the department to establish 4 49 that the amount in
question represented the income of the assessee the tribunal held that no penalty could be imposed.
now penalty can be imposed under s. 28 (1) (c) if the income tax officer, the appellate assistant
commissioner or the appellate tribunal in the course of any proceedings under the income-tax act
1922 is satisfied that any person "has concealed the particulars of his income or deliberately
furnished inaccurate particulars of such income". in the judgment under appeal reference has been
made to the decisions of the various high courts on the true ambit and scope of this provision and
the burden in the matter of establishing concealment of particulars of income or deliberately
furnishing inaccurate particulars of such income. the majority of high courts, namely, bombay in
commissioner of income-tax, ahmedabad v. gokuldas harivallabhdas(1), gujarat in commissioner
of income-tax gujarat v. l. h. vora (2 ) and patna in commissioner of income-tax bihar & orissa v.
mohan mallah(3) had expressed the view that proceedings under s. 28 ( 1 ) (c) were of a penal
nature and it was for the department to establish that the assessee was guilty of concealment of, the
particulars of income. the mere fact that the assessee had given a false explanation did not prove
that the receipt necessarily constituted income of the assessee. allahabad high court, however, in
moman rain rant kumar(1) v. commissioner of income-tax u.p. observed that where the
explanation offered by the assessee in respect of an item of income- shown as capital receipt was
deliberately false it was open to the income-tax authorities to impose a penalty under s. 2 8 (1)
(c). in the earlier judgment in lal chand gopal das v. commissioner of income-tax u.p.(5) the
allahabad court had said that if a receipt was income but was disguised in the account or in the
return as a non-assessable receipt it was clearly a case of concealment of the particulars or of
furnishing inaccurate particulars of income and a penalty under s. 2 8 (1) (c) should be imposed on
the assessee. the first point which falls 'for determination is whether the imposition of penalty is in
the nature of a penal provision. the determination of the question of burden of proof will depend
largely on the penalty proceedings being penal in nature or being merely meant for imposition of an
additional tax,, the liability to pay such tax having been designated as penalty under s. 28. one line
of argument which has prevailed particularly with the allahabad high court in lal chand gopal
das(5) cage is that there was no essential difference between tax and penalty because the liability for
payment of both was imposed as a part of the- (1) 34 i.t.r. 98. (2) 56 i.t.r.
126. (3) 54 i.t.r. 499. (4) 59 ].t.
p. 135.
(5) 48 i.t.r. 324.,
-machinery of assessment and the penalty was merely an additional tax imposed in certain
circumstances on account of the assessee's conduct. the justification of this view was founded on
certain observations in c. a. abraham v. income-tax officer, kottayam & anr.(1). it is true thatcommissioner of income tax west ... vs anwar ali on 29 april, 1970
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1629738/ 4penalty proceedings under  s. 28 are included in the expression "assessment" and the true nature of
penalty has been held to be additional tax. but one of the principal objects in enacting s. 28 is to
provide a deterrent against recurrence of default on the part of the assessee. the section is penal in
the sense that its consequences are intended to be an effective deterrent which will put a stop to
practices which the legislature considers to be against the public interest. it is significant that in c.
a. abraham's(1) case this court was not called upon to determine whether penalty proceedings were
penal or of quasi penal nature and the observations made with regard to penalty being an additional
tax were made in a different context and for a different purpose. it appears to have been taken as
settled by now in the sales tax law that an order imposing penalty is the result of a quasi criminal
proceedings; (hindustan steel ltd. v. the state of orissa(1). in england also it has never been
doubted that such proceedings are penal; fattorini (thomas) (lanchashire) (ltd., v. inland revenue
commissioner (3). the next question is that when proceedings under s. 28 are penal in character
what would be the nature of the burden upon the department for establishing that the assessee is
liable to payment of penalty. as has been rightly observed by chagla c.j., in commissioner of
income-tax, ahmedabad v, gokuldas harivallabhdas (4) the gist of the offence under s. 2 8 ( 1 ) (c)
is that the assessee has concealed the particulars of his income or deliberately furnished inaccurate
particulars of such income and therefore the department must establish that the receipt of the
amount in dispute ,constitutes income of the assessee. if there is no evidence on the record except
the explanation given by the assessee which ,explanation has been found to be false it does not
follow that the receipt constitutes his taxable income.
another point is whether a finding given in the assessment proceedings that a particular receipt is
income after rejecting the explanation given by the assessee as false would prima facie be sufficient
for establishing in proceedings under  s. 28 that the disputed amount was the assessee's income. it
must be remembered that the proceedings under s. 28 are of a penal nature and the burden is on
the department to prove that a particular amount (1) 41 1. t.r. 425.
(3) 1943 (11) i.t.r. (supp.)50.
(2) c.a.s. 883-392/66 dt. 4-8-1969.
(4) 34 i.t.r. 98.
is a revenue receipt. it would be perfectly legitimate to say that the mere fact that the explanation of
the assessee is false does not necessarily give rise to the inference that the disputed amount
represents income. it cannot be said that the finding given in the assessment proceedings for
determining or computing the tax is conclusive. however it is good evidence. before penalty can be
imposed the entirety of circumstances must reasonably point to the conclusion that the disputed
amount represented income and that the assessee had consciously concealed the particulars of his
income or had deliberately furnished. inaccurate particulars.
in the present case, it was neither suggested before the high court nor has it been contended before
us that apart from the falsity of the explanation given by the assessee there was cogent material or
evidence from which it could be inferred that the assessee had concealed the particulars of hiscommissioner of income tax west ... vs anwar ali on 29 april, 1970
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1629738/ 5income or had deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars in respect of the same and that the
disputed amount was a revenue receipt. the question was, therefore, rightly answered by the high
court.
the appeal fails and it is dismissed with costs.
v.p.s.                                            appeal
dismissed.
4 5 2commissioner of income tax west ... vs anwar ali on 29 april, 1970
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1629738/ 6