supreme court of india
chainrup sampatram vs commissioner of income-tax,west ... on 9 october, 1953
equivalent citations: 1953 air 519, 1954 scr 211
author: m p sastri
bench: sastri, m. patanjali (cj), das, sudhi ranjan, bose, vivian, hasan, ghulam, bhagwati,
natwarlal h.
           petitioner:
chainrup sampatram
        vs.
respondent:
commissioner of income-tax,west bengal.
date of judgment:
09/10/1953
bench:
sastri, m. patanjali (cj)
bench:
sastri, m. patanjali (cj)
das, sudhi ranjan
bose, vivian
hasan, ghulam
bhagwati, natwarlal h.
citation:
 1953 air  519            1954 scr  211
 citator info :
 rf         1991 sc1338  (17)
act:
indian  income-tax  act  (xi of  1922),  ss.  4(1)(b)   and
14(2)(c)-ascertainment    of   profit   by   valuation    of
 stock-stock-in-trade  removed  to native  state-place  where
 profit accrues -exemption under s. 14 (2)    (c)-principles
 underlying valuation of stock.
headnote:
  the  assesses firm which carried on business at  calcutta
in bullion despatched during the accounting year to bikaner,
where  its  partners resided, a certain quantity  of  silver
bars  and showed them a,; having been sold to the  partners.
the income-tax authorities disbelieved the story of the sale
and, treating the bars as stock-in-trade and valuing them at
their  market value at the close of the year which was  much
higher  than  the cost, assessed the firm's profits  at  rs.
2,20,887.  the assessee contended that, even admitting  that
the  bars  were  the stock-in-trade  of  the  business,  thechainrup sampatram vs commissioner of income-tax,west ... on 9 october, 1953
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127231/ 1increased value at the close of the year accrued at  bikaner
and  was exempt from tax in british india under s.  14(2)(c)
of  the  income-tax  act.   the high  court  held  that  the
notional  profit representing the appreciation in  value  of
the  stock-in-trade  emerged out of the  valuation  and  the
profit accordingly arose at the time when, and at the  place
where, the valuation was made, and as the valuation was made
at  calcutta  s. 14(2)(c) did not apply and the  profit  was
taxable.  on appeal,
212
held, that the view of the high court that the profit  &rose
out  of the valuation of the closing stock and the situs  of
its accrual or arising was therefore where the valuation was
made, was erroneous.  the conclusion of the high court  that
the profit did not accrue in bikaner but at calcutta  could,
however,  be  supported on another ground,  viz.,  that  the
source  of  the profit was the business and  as  the  profit
could  be  correctly  ascertained according  to  the  method
adopted by the assessee only after bringing into the trading
account  his closing stock wherever it may exist, the  whole
of the profits must be taken to accrue or arise at the place
of carrying on the business, viz., calcutta,
  the  principles  underlying the  method  of  ascertaining
profits by valuation of stock at the beginning and close  of
the  year  and of the rule that the closing stock is  to  be
valued  at  cost or market value, whichever  is  the  lower,
explained.
whimstar  and co. v. commissioners of inland revenue  (12
tax  cas.  813) and commissioner of  income-tax,  madras  v.
chengalvaraya chetty (i.l.r. 48 mad. 836) referred to.
judgment:
civil appellate jurisdiction civil appeal no. 142 of 1952.
appeal by special leave granted by the supreme court by its order dated the 14th march, 1952, from
the judgment and order dated the 4th day of june, 1951, of the high court of judicature at calcutta
(chakravartti and das gupta jj.) special jurisdiction (income-tax) in i.t.r. nos. 7 and 6 of 1947
arising out of the order dated the 26th day of march, 1946, of the income-tax appellate tribunal,
calcutta bench, in 66 r.a. no. 3 bengal 1946-47 and 66 r.a. no. 4 bengal 1946-47.
n.c. chatterjee (s. n. mukherji, with him) for the appellant.
c.k. daphtary, solicitor-general for india (o. n. joshi, with him) for the respondent.
1953. october 9. the judgment of the court was delivered by patanjali sastri c. t.-this is an
appeal by special leave from a judgment of the high court of judicature at calcutta answering a
reference by the income-tax appellate tribunal under section 66 (2) of the indian income-tax act,chainrup sampatram vs commissioner of income-tax,west ... on 9 october, 1953
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127231/ 21922, hereinafter referred to as "the act".
the appellant is a registered firm consisting of two brothers as partners with equal shares. the firm
was carrying on business at calcutta as bullion merchants dealing mainly in silver and kept its books
of account on the mercantile basis. in the course of the year of account 1997 (ramnavami)
corresponding to 1941-42, 582 bars of silver (some from the old stock in hand at calcutta and some
purchased elsewhere during the year) were sent to bikaner where the partners resided, and their
value at cost was credited in the books of the firm. in the assessment of the firm for the year
1942-43, it was alleged that the said silver bars had been sold to the partners for their domestic use
but the income-tax authorities held that the alleged sale was not "genuine and that the said silver
bars still formed part of the stock-in-trade of the firm at the close of the previous year 1997, and they
accordingly included in the taxable profits a sum of rs. 2,20,887 as the excess arising from the
valuation of the said 582 bars at market price on the closing day. they were valued at market rate at
which the rest of the closing stock at calcutta was valued in the books of the firm.
on appeal the appellate tribunal, on a consideration of all the facts and circumstances of the case,
recorded its finding as follows:
"all these circumstances make it clear to us that the action of the income-tax authorities in treating
the stock of silver bars in bikaner as part of the stock-in-trade of the calcutta business was amply
justified. the appellant on account of the panic in calcutta had to remove the valuable
stock-in-trade to a safe place in bikaner just as many other calcutta businessmen did at that time.
the partners of the firm then noticed the upward trend of the silver market, and decided to take
advantage of the camouflage afforded by the entries in the books of account and the story of sale to
partners, so that the profit of the year of account could be substantially reduced artificially."
the appeal was accordingly dismissed. the application by the firm under section 66(1) of the act
asking for a reference to the high court of six questions as questions of law arising out of the order
of the tribunal was also rejected.
thereupon the firm moved the high court under section 66(2), and the court directed the tribunal
to refer the following question of law for its decision:
whether in the circumstances of the case and on a true construction of section 4 (1) (b) and section
14 (2) (c) of the indian income-tax act, the sum of rs. 2,20,887 was in law assessable to tax ?
the reference was heard by chakravartti and das gupta jj., who answered the question in the
affirmative. the firm being admittedly resident and ordinarily resident within the meaning of
sections 4-a and 4-b in what was then known as british india, its total income would include also
income accruing or arising to it without british india under section 4 (1) (b) (ii). the firm, however,
claimed exemption in respect of the said sum under section 14(2)(c) which provided that the tax
shall not be payable by an assessee in respect of any income, profits or gains accruing or arising to
him within an indian state. it was contended that even on the finding of the income-tax authorities
that the silver bars in question formed part of the stock-in-trade of the business at calcutta and theirchainrup sampatram vs commissioner of income-tax,west ... on 9 october, 1953
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127231/ 3removal to bikaner had been effected only for reasons of security, the said bars having remained
there during the rest of the accounting year, their value at the market rate at the close of the year
being an increment to the goods at bikaner, the profit accrued at bikaner (their an indian state),
with the result that it was exempted under section 14 (2) (c).
the high court rejected this contention on the ground that the " notional profit " represented by the
appreciation in value of the stock-in-trade " emerges out of the valuation and only when it so
emerges it arises or accrues. the source of the profit is thus the valuation, and its situs is where the
valuation is made. what is valued is the firm's business at the site of the firm and all the
stock-in-trade of the firm is necessarily drawn into the valuation wherever they may be physically
situated. the profit which is the result of the stock valuation of a business is thus sui generis, a type
by itself, to which the ordinary notions of a physical accrual will not apply. it comes into existence
when the valuation is made and since it arises out of the valuation, it arises, in respect of the whole
stock-in-trade, at the site of the firm whose stock-in-trade is being valued irrespective of where parts
of the stock-in-trade may be."
while we agree with the conclusion that no part of the profits of the firm in the accounting year can
be said to have accrued or arisen at bikaner, the reasoning by which the learned judges arrived at
that conclusion seems to us, with all respect, to proceed on a misconception. it is wrong to assume
that the valuation of the closing stock at market rate has, for its object, the bringing into charge any
appreciation in the value of such stock. the true purpose of crediting the value of unsold stock is to
balance the cost of those goods entered on the other side of the account at the time of their
purchase, so that the cancelling out of the entries relating to the same stock from both sides of the
account would leave only the transactions on which there have been actual sales in the course of the
year showing the profit or loss actually realised on the year's trading. as pointed out in paragraph 8
of the report of the committee on financial risks attaching to the holding of trading stocks, 1919, "
as the entry for stock which appears in a trading account is merely intended to cancel the charge for
the goods purchased which have not been sold, it should necessarily represent the cost of the goods.
if it is more or less than the cost, then the effect is to state the profit on the goods which actually
have been sold at the incorrect figure...... from this rigid doctrine one exception is very generally
recognised on prudential grounds and is now fully sanctioned by custom, viz., the adoption of
market value at the date of making -up accounts, if that value is less than cost. it is of course an
anticipation of the loss that may be made on those goods in the following year, and may even have
the effect, if prices rise again, of attributing to the following year's results a greater amount of profit
than the difference between the actual sale price and the actual cost price of the goods in question"
(extracted in paragraph 281 of the report of the committee on the taxation of trading profits
presented to british parliament in april, 1951). while anticipated loss is thus taken into account,
anticipated profit in the shape of appreciated value of the closing stock is not brought into the
account, as no prudent trader would care to show increased profit before its actual realisation. this
is the theory underlying the rule that the closing stock is to be valued at cost or market price
whichever is the lower, and it is now generally accepted as an established rule of commercial
practice and accountancy. as profits for income-tax purposes are to be computed in conformity with
the ordinary principles of commercial accounting, unless, of course, such principles have been
superseded or modified by legislative enactments, unrealised profits in the shape of appreciatedchainrup sampatram vs commissioner of income-tax,west ... on 9 october, 1953
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127231/ 4value of goods remaining unsold at the end of an accounting year and carried over to the following
year's account in a business that is continuing are not brought into the charge as a matter of
practice, though, as already stated, loss due to a fall in price below cost is allowed even if such loss
has not been actually realised. as truly observed by one of the learned judges in whimstar & co. v.
commissioners of inland revenue(1), " under this law (revenue law) the profits are the profits
realised in the course of the year. what seems an exception is recognised where a trader purchased
and still holds goods or stocks which have fallen in value. no loss has been realised. loss may not
occur. nevertheless, at the close of the year he is permitted to treat these goods or stocks as of their
market value."
an illustration of the rule in its practical working is to be found in the case of the commissioner of
income-tax, madras v. chengalvaraya chetti(2). in 1921 the (1) 12 tax cas. 813, 827. (2) (1925)
i.l.r. 48 mad. 836.
assessee purchased a large stock of piece-goods at rs. 13-8 a piece. at the end of the year the market
value fell to rs. 6 a piece, and he made out a loss by valuing the whole stock at the market rate,
including the unsold pieces in hand at the end of the year. the loss was allowed in his assessment to
income-tax. in the following year (1922), however, he entered the same unsold goods as opening
stock at the cost price of rs. 13-8. some of those pieces remained unsold at the end of 1922 also and
he credited their value at rs. 8-8 a piece, the market rate then prevailing, and showed a loss on the
year's trading. the income-tax authorities refused to allow the loss thus calculated, and assessed
him as having made a profit on the footing that the opening stock of 1922 should have been valued
at rs. 6 a piece and the unsold pieces at rs. 8-8 a piece. the assessment was upheld as properly
made, though, it will be seen, the transactions of 1922, or even of the two years taken together,
ended actually in a loss. thus, while the valuation of the unsold stock at the end of each year at
market rate which was less than cost was accepted, the valuation of the unsold goods carried over as
opening stock of 1922 at rs. 6 a piece consistently with their valuation as the closing stock of 1921
was insisted upon in order to rectify the distorted picture of the trading results of 1921 which were
not correctly reflected in the accounts by reason of the assessee having adopted the lower market
rate instead of cost as the value of the closing stock in 1921. if the market had risen to, say, rs. 15
instead of to rs. 8-8 a piece at the end of 1922, then' on the principles indicated above, it would have
been open to the assessee to value the closing stock at cost (rs. 13-8), and the income-tax
authorities could not have claimed to bring into the assessment the appreciated value of the unsold
goods. it will thus be seen that no question of charging the-appreciated value of closing stock as "
notional profits " can really arise. in the present case, although it would appear that the cost price of
part of the silver despatched to bikaner was less than the market price at the end of the year, the
reference did not raise any question regarding the basis on which the amount in dispute, viz., rs.
2,20,887, was arrived at. on the other hand, the question referred assumed that the said sum was
correctly computed and put in issue only its assessability in law on a true construction of section
4(1) (b) and section 14(2) (c) of the act. again, it is a misconception to think that any -profit " arises
out of the valuation of the closing stock and the situs of its arising or accrual is where the valuation
is made. as already stated, valuation of unsold stock at the close of an accounting period is a
necessary part of the process of determining the trading results of that period, and can in no sense
be regarded as the " source " of such profits. nor can the place where such valuation is made bechainrup sampatram vs commissioner of income-tax,west ... on 9 october, 1953
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127231/ 5regarded as the " situs of their accrual ". the source of the profits and gains of a business is
indubitably the business, and the place of their accrual is where the business is carried on. as such
profits can be correctly ascertained according to the method adopted by an assessee only after
bringing into the trading account his closing stock wherever it may exist, the whole of the profits
must be taken to accrue or arise at the place of carrying on the business. on the finding of the
income-tax authorities that the 582 bars of silver lying at bikaner had not been really sold but
remained part of the unsold stock of the firm's business at the end of the accounting year, the whole
of the profits of that year must be taken to have accrued or arisen at calcutta where the business was
carried on, no part of that business having admittedly been transacted at bikaner.
we agree with the high court that the question referred should be answered in the affirmative
though on different grounds. the appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs.
appeal dismissed.
agent for the appellant: p. k. mukherji.
agent for the respondent: g. h. rajadhyaksha.chainrup sampatram vs commissioner of income-tax,west ... on 9 october, 1953
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127231/ 6