supreme court of india
the commissioner of income-tax, ... vs smt. kasturbai walchand trust, ... on 31 october, 1966
equivalent citations: 1967 air 844, 1967 scr (1) 7
author: v bhargava
bench: bhargava, vishishtha
           petitioner:
the commissioner of income-tax, bombay
        vs.
respondent:
smt.  kasturbai walchand trust, bombay
date of judgment:
31/10/1966
bench:
bhargava, vishishtha
bench:
bhargava, vishishtha
shah, j.c.
ramaswami, v.
citation:
 1967 air  844            1967 scr  (1)   7
act:
income  tax act 1922, s. 4(3)(i)-income of  trust  property-
payable  to beneficiary during her  lifetime-thereafter  for
specified    charitable    purposes-beneficiary    executing
surrender  of beneficial interest-thereafter  whether  trust
property held wholly for charitable purposes and exempt from
tax-whether   income   of  trust  property   receivable   by
beneficiary or by trust on behalf of beneficiary.
headnote:
by a deed executed in november 1946, the respondent and  her
husband created a trust in respect of their properties.   in
accordance  with  clause 7 of the deed, the  income  of  the
trust properties was to be paid to the respondent during her
lifetime  and,  by clause 8 the trustees  were  directed  to
apply   the  income,  from  and  after  the  death  of   the
respondent, to certain charitable purposes enumerated in the
deed.   on july 21, 1955, the respondent executed a deed  of
surrender whereby she gave up her beneficial interest in the
income  of the trust so that it may immediately vest in  the
trustees  and  may be utilised for the  charitable  purposes
mentioned in the trust deed.
in the course of assessment to income tax in respect of  thethe commissioner of income-tax, ... vs smt. kasturbai walchand trust, ... on 31 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/770671/ 1income  from the trust properties for the  assessment  years
1956-57  to 1959-60, it was claimed on behalf of  the  trust
that during the relevant previous years, the properties were
held  under  a  trust wholly for  charitable  purposes,  and
consequently, the income was exempt from income-tax under s.
4(3)(i) of the income tax act, 1922.  the income tax officer
rejected  this claim on the view that the deed of  surrender
executed by the respondent did not amount to renouncement of
her rights under the trust deed and that it really  amounted
to  a transfer of the income received by her for the use  of
the  trust;  and  since the income  was  receivable  by  the
respondent,  the trust properties were not held  wholly  for
charitable  purposes.   however,. the:  appellate  assistant
commissioner, on appeal held that the income from the  trust
properties  was  exempt under s. 4(3)(i) and this  view  was
upheld  by the tribunal.  the high court, upon a  reference,
also held in favour of the trust.
it  was also contended on behalf of the department  that  as
clause  8  of  the  trust deed  executed  in  november  1946
provided that the income of the trust was to be applied  for
charitable  purposes  "from  and after  the  death"  of  the
respondent  the  trustees could not, during  her  life-time,
apply  the income for any charitable purposes and  therefore
no exemption could be claimed under s, 4(3) (i).
held:the  income from the trust properties -after  july
21, 1955 was exempt from tax under s. 4(3) (i). [ 1 3 b-c]
whenever  a valid trust is executed, the property  vests  in
the trustees, and the income accruing from those  properties
is  the  income of the trust and not of  the  beneficiaries.
for purposes of income-tax law, however, the income under s.
41(1)  of the act is treated as received by the trustees  on
behalf of the beneficiaries, but is to be taxed in the hands
of  the  trustees  as  it  would be  in  the  hands  of  the
beneficary for whom it is
8
received.  in the present case, therefore, it would be wrong
to  proceed on any assumption that the income of  the  trust
properties  was  received  by  the  respondent.   once   the
respondent renounced her interest by the deed of july  1955,
which  was  clearly  valid in view of s. 58  of  the  indian
trusts act, the entire properties were held by the  trustees
for  the charitable purpose mentioned in clause  8,  because
that was the only purpose of the trust which then  remained.
the income which accrued thereafter was come which could  be
applied  or  allowed to accumulate for  application  to  the
charitable  purposes mentioned in clause 8 and for no  other
purpose. [10 e; 11 b-h]
even  if it were to be held that by virtue of clause  8  the
trustees could not apply the income for charitable  purposes
so  long as the respondent was alive, the only effect  would
be  that  the income would accumulate.   such  accumulations
would also be exempt from the liability to income-tax  under
s.  4(3) (i) as soon as the rights of the respondent  ceasedthe commissioner of income-tax, ... vs smt. kasturbai walchand trust, ... on 31 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/770671/ 2on  the  execution by her of the deed of surrender  in  july
1955. [12 f-]
judgment:
civil appellate jurisdiction : civil appeals nos. 180 to 183 of 1966.
appeal by special leave from the judgment and order dated september 27, 1962 of the bombay high
court in income-tax reference no. 42 of 1961.
b. sen, gopal singh and b. n. sachthey, for the appellant (in all the appeals).
s. t. desai and ravinder narain, for the respondent (in all the appeals).
the judgment of the court was delivered by bhargava, j. seth walchand hirachand and his wife,
dai kasturbai, owned certain shares, had several insurance policies, owned house property and also
held lease lands. the two of them together joined in executing an indenture on 25th november,
1946, by which they created a trust. the trustees were both of them themselves and three brothers of
seth walchand. the provisions of the trust, with which we are concerned, laid down that, after
defraying the expenses for management of the trust properties and certain other expenses, such as,
rents, rates, etc.,, the trustees were to pay to bai kasturbai, during her lifetime, the income arising
from the trust funds and properties. further, seth walchand himself and bai kasturbai, during their
life-time, had the right of residence in some of the house property, free of rent and without any
obligation for payment of any out goings or moneys in respect thereof. these provisions were
contained in clause 7 of the deed of trust. the next provision contained in clause 8 of the deed was
that, from and after the death of bai kasturbai, the trustees were directed to apply the net rents,
profits and income of the properties and trust funds, at their discretion, on charitable purposes
enumerated in the deed of trust. it is not disputed that all the charitable purposes mentioned in the
trust constituted public charities. seth walchand died and, thereafter, bai kasturbai, on 21 st july,
1955, executed a deed in which the relevant clause runs as follows:-
"bai kasturbai walchand both hereby surrender, release, quit claim, transfer and
assign unto the trustees all the income to arise as from the 21st day of july one
thousand nine hundred and fifty-five from the trust funds of the investments for the
time being representing the same and her beneficial life interest and all her rights,
claims and demands under the said indenture of settlement including the liberty to
occupy and enjoy rent free of the lands, hereditaments, messages and premises
described in the first and second schedules hereto the intent that her beneficial
interest may be determined as aforesaid and that the same may be immediately
vested in the trustees and that the trustees may utilise the same for charitable
purposes mentioned in the said indenture of settlement."the commissioner of income-tax, ... vs smt. kasturbai walchand trust, ... on 31 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/770671/ 3subsequent to the execution of this deed, the question arose of assessment to income-tax of the
income from the trust properties for the assessment years 1956-57, 1957-58, 1958- 59 and 1959-60.
the corresponding previous years were the financial years ending on 31st march in the years 1956 to
1959. it was claimed by the trust that, during these previous years, these properties were held under
a trust wholly for charitable purposes, and consequently, the income was exempt from income-tax
under s. 4(3)(i) of the income- tax act (hereinafter referred to as "the act"). the in- ,come-tax
officer, however, held that the deed executed by bai kasturbai did not amount to a renouncement of
her rights under the trust deed, and that it really amounted to a transfer of the income received by
her for purposes of the use of the trust. since the income of the trust was receivable by bai
kasturbai, it could not be held that the trust properties were held wholly for charitable purposes. on
appeal, the appellate assistant commissioner ,disagreed with the income-tax officer and accepted
the submission made by the respondent, holding that the income received by the trust, after the
execution of the deed of surrender by bai kasturbai, was exempt from tax under s. 4(3)(i) of the act
in view of the applicability of s. 9 of the indian trusts act, 1882. the income-tax appellate tribunal,
on further appeal, upheld the same decision, but on a slightly different ground. the tribunal's view
was that the surrender by bai kasturbai was valid under s. 58 of the indian trusts act, and
consequently, after that deed was executed, the properties were held wholly for charitable purposes
and the income was exempt from tax under s. 4(3)(i) of the act. thereupon, at the request of the
commissioner of income-tax, the following question was referred for the opinion of the high court
of bombay:
m19sup.ci/66-2 .lm15 "whether clause 8 of the trust, settlement made on the 25th november,
1946, came into operation immediately following the declaration made by bai kasturbai on the 21st
july, 1955, and as such the income that accrued or arose to the trustees from the trust property from
21st july, 1955, onwards was exempt under s' 4(3)(i) of the act?" the high court answered the
question in favour of the trust, which is the respondent in these appeals before us, and
consequently, the commissioner of income-tax has come up to this court in these appeals by special
leave. it appears that, in this case, the question that was framed by the income-tax appellate
tribunal and referred to the high court was not happily worded, so that it will need a slight
amendment which we shall indicate later. the real question under dispute was whether, after the.
execution of the deed of surrender on 21st july, 1955, the income from the trust properties was
exempt from income-tax under  s. 4(3)(i) of the act or not. in dealing with this question, it has to be
kept in view that, even under the deed of trust as originally executed on 25th november, 1946, the
income from the trust properties was not the income of bai kasturbai. whenever a valid trust is
executed, the property vests in the trustees, and the income accruing from those properties is the
income of the trust and not of the beneficiaries. for purposes of income-tax law, however, the
income under s. 41(1) of the act is treated as received by the trustees on behalf of the beneficiaries,
but is to be taxed in the hands of the trustees in the like manner and to the same amount as it would
be leviable upon the person on whose behalf such income is receivable. the liability of the income to
tax is, therefore, independent of the income actually being received by the beneficiaries and may be
subjected to tax as soon as it is earned by the trust. the exception is that, where the trust properties
are held wholly for charitable or religious purpose in so far as such income is. applied or
accumulated for application to such religious or charitable purposes, it is exempt from, income- tax.
in the present case, therefore, in dealing with the question referred to the high court, anythe commissioner of income-tax, ... vs smt. kasturbai walchand trust, ... on 31 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/770671/ 4assumption that the income of the trust properties was received by bai kasturbai will not be correct.
the income during her life-time was clearly taxable as income in the hands of the trustees received
by them on behalf of bai kasturbai. subsequently, when bai kasturbai executed the deed of
surrender on 21st july, 1955, she made a declaration that she was giving up all her rights to the
income. in clear words, she stated in the deed that she was surrendering, releasing, transferring and
assigning unto the trustees all the income which was to arise after that date from the trust
properties, and that she was also surrendering all her rights, claims and demands under the deed of
trust, including her right to occupy and enjoy rent-free lands, hereditaments, messuages and
premises described in the trust-deed. it was further stated by her that the deed was executed with
the intent that her beneficial interest may be determined and the same may be immediately vested
in the trustees and that the trustees may utilise the same for charitable purposes mentioned in the
deed of trust. this deed executed by bai kasturbai was clearly valid in view of the provision
contained in s. 58 of the indian trusts act (no. 2 of 1882) which provides that "the beneficiary, if
competent to contract, may transfer his interest but subject to the law for the time being in force as
to the circumstances and extent in and to, which he may dispose of such interest." bai kasturbai was
quite competent to contract so as to transfer her interest under the deed of trust, and by executing
the deed dated 21st july, 1955, she surrendered all her rights. the right which had accrued to her
under clause 7 of the deed of' trust was the right to use certain immovable properties and to receive
the net income arising from trust properties. the right to receive the income arose because of the
obligation laid on the trustees to pay the net income to her during her life-time. that was clearly the
right as a beneficiary under the trust, and when she executed the indenture dated 21 st july, 1955,
she surrendered that right in favour of the trust for charitable purposes, so that her right became
extinguished. it may be mentioned that, at one stage, an attempt was made on behalf of the
commissioner of income-tax to raise the question about the validity of this deed of surrender, but,
when the commissioner asked the tribunal to refer a question about the competence of bai
kasturbai to renounce her beneficial interest under the trust, settlement, that request was refused
by the tribunal. the commissioner did not, thereafter, move the high court to obtain a statement
of the case from the tribunal on that question, so that, in these appeals, it is no longer open to the
commissioner to contend that bai kasturbai was not competent to renounce her beneficial interest.
once she renounced her interest, the direction contained in the deed of trust to the trustees to pay
to her the net income of the trust properties ceased, though the trustees continued to hold the
property under the trust. at the same time, the right of bai kasturbai to use the immovable
properties also ceased to exist. thereafter, clearly, the entire properties were held by the trustees,
for the charitable purposes mentioned in clause 8, because that was the only purpose of the trust
which remained after this deed of surrender had been executed by bai kasturbai. on these facts, it is
clear that the income, which accrued from the trust properties thereafter, was income which could
be applied or allowed to accumulate for application to the charitable purposes mentioned in clause 8
and for no other purpose.
high court and the tribunal as to whether clause 8 of the deed of trust could come into effect so as
to permit the trustees to apply the income of the trust properties for the charitable purposes
mentioned in that clause even before the death of bai kasturbai. that clause, in clear words says
that the trustees shall apply the -said net rents, profits and income, etc. in all or any of the
charitable purposes mentioned therein "from and after the death of bai kasturbai". relying on thisthe commissioner of income-tax, ... vs smt. kasturbai walchand trust, ... on 31 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/770671/ 5last expression, it was urged that unless bai kasturbai died, the trustees were not permitted to
apply the income for the charitable purposes mentioned in clause 8. it seems to us that, in this case,
it was quite unnecessary to go into this question for the purpose of deciding whether the income of
the trust properties, after the deed of surrender by bai kasturbai executed on 21st july, 1955, was
exempt from income-tax under  s. 4(3)(i) of the act. under that provision, the income from trust
properties, held wholly for charitable or religious purposes, is exempt from tax under two
circumstances. the first is when that income is actually applied for such religious or charitable
purposes, and the second is when it is accumulated for application to such religious or charitable
purposes. in this case, as we have indicated above, as soon as bai kasturbai executed the deed of
surrender, her rights under clause 7 completely ceased and all the income from the trust properties
remained with the trustees to be applied in accordance with other terms of the deed of trust. if it
could be held that clause 8 came into operation and permitted the application of that income to the
charitable purposes mentioned in it as soon as bai kasturbai's rights ceased, even though she
remained alive, there would be no difficulty in holding that  s. 4(3)(i) would have exempted the
income from income-tax. in fact, this ,view was accepted by all the income-tax authorities. however,
,even if it be held that clause 8 did not come into operation and the 'trustees were incompetent to
apply the income of the trust properties for the purposes mentioned in it so long as bai kasturbai
was alive, the only effect would be that that income would accumulate and that accumulation would
continue during the life-time of bai kasturbai. on her death, the accumulated income would have to
be applied by the trustees for the charitable purposes mentioned in clause 8. consequently, the
income of the trust properties became exempt from liability to income-tax as soon as the rights of
bai kasturbai ceased on execution by her of the ,deed of surrender dated 21st july, 1955, even
though it may not be held that clause 8 came into operation from that very date. it is in these
circumstances that we consider that, in framing the question, the tribunal committed an error. the
exemption of the income of the trust properties from liability to income-tax was not dependent
entirely on coming into operation of clause 8. and we, therefore, think that the question framed
should have been broken up into two parts as follows:-
" (1) whether clause 8 of the trust settlement made on 25th november, 1946, came
into operation immediately following the declaration made by bai kasturbai on 21st
july, 1955, and (2)whether, in the circumstances of this case, the income that
accrued or arose to the trustees from the trust properties from 21st july, 1955,
onwards was exempt under section 4(3)(i) of the act."
if the question is so broken up, the first question becomes unnecessary, and the second question has
to be answered in favour of the respondent. the answer to the second question is the only one that is
material for purposes of determining the liability of the income of the trust to tax. that question has
been answered by the high court in favour of the respondent. the appeals, therefore, fail and are
dismissed with costs. there will be one bearing fee.
r.k.p,s.                                             appeals
dismissed.the commissioner of income-tax, ... vs smt. kasturbai walchand trust, ... on 31 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/770671/ 6the commissioner of income-tax, ... vs smt. kasturbai walchand trust, ... on 31 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/770671/ 7