supreme court of india
commissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
equivalent citations: 1959 air 291, 1959 scr supl. (1) 110
author: t v aiyyar
bench: aiyyar, t.l. venkatarama
           petitioner:
commissioner of income-tax, nagpur
        vs.
respondent:
rai bahadur jairam valji and others
date of judgment:
07/10/1958
bench:
aiyyar, t.l. venkatarama
bench:
aiyyar, t.l. venkatarama
gajendragadkar, p.b.
sarkar, a.k.
citation:
 1959 air  291            1959 scr  supl. (1) 110
 citator info :
 e&d        1959 sc 814  (24,52,54)
 r          1959 sc1352  (8)
 rf         1961 sc1579  (30,31,34)
 rf         1964 sc 758  (12)
 rf         1965 sc  65  (5,31,33)
 r          1971 sc1590  (9)
 r          1972 sc 386  (12)
 r          1973 sc 515  (9)
 r          1973 sc1011  (15,20)
 d          1987 sc 500  (36)
 rf         1992 sc1495  (31)
act:
       income  tax-capital  or  revenue  receipt-compensation   for
       premature  termination of contract-whether  trading  receipt
       -liability to tax-lndian income-tax act, 1922 (xi of 1922).
headnote:
the respondent had been carrying on business in the  produc-
tion  and  supply  of limestone since  1920,  and  under  an
agreement  entered  into with the bengal  iron  company  was
supplying  all its requirements of limestone  and  dolomite.
sometime  later the indian iron and steel company took  overcommissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 1all  the  assets  and liabilities  of  the  former  company.
subsequently   differences   having   arisen   between   the
respondent  and  the  indian iron  and  steel  company  they
entered  into an agreement on may 9, 1940, in settlement  of
all  the  disputes  between them whereby,  inter  alia,  the
respondent was to work a quarry of the company for a  period
of  25 years and to supply the limestone quarried  therefrom
to the company according to its requirements and to get from
the  railway  authorities facilities  for  transporting  the
limestone  more  economically; and it was agreed  that  till
such  facilities were given, the respondent was to  be  paid
rs. 4000/- every month.  under the agreement the  respondent
had  the right to work other quarries of his own and  supply
limestone  so  quarried to other  purchasers.   the  railway
authorities  having declined to grant facilities, it  became
impossible  to  carry  out  the  agreement  in  the   manner
contemplated by the parties, who, thereupon, entered into  a
fresh agreement on august 2, 1941, terminating
111
the  agreement  dated may 9, 1940, on  certain  terms.   the
agreement  provided inter alia (1) that the  company  should
pay " rs. 2,50,000/- to the sellers as solatium besides  the
monthly  instalments of rs. 4000/-", remaining unpaid  under
the contract dated may 9, 1940, (2) that the company  should
purchase  limestone from the respondent for a period  of  12
years,  and (3) that the respondent was to be appointed  the
loading contractors of the company for loading iron ore.  on
a  question as to whether the the sum of rs. 2,50,000/-  was
liable  to  tax,  the respondent claimed that  it  was  not,
'being a capital receipt but the income-tax authorities held
that  it was a trading receipt and was income chargeable  to
tax.   the high court however held on a reference  under  s.
66(1), that the income was not chargeable to tax, and  hence
the  present appeal.  in support of the appeal, the  respon-
dent contended inter alia that (1) the contract dated may 9,
1940,  was  for a period of 25 years of which more  than  23
years had still to run at the time of the settlement, and it
was therefore an asset of an enduring character, capital  in
character, and the compensation paid therefor was a  capital
receipt,  and (2) that the true character of  the  agreement
was  that  it brought into existence  an  arrangement  which
would  enable the respondent to carry on a business and  was
not  itself  any  business, and any  payment  made  for  the
termination of such an agreement was a capital receipt.
held, that the contract of may 9, 1940, was entered into  by
the  respondent in the ordinary course of his  business  and
that  the sum of rs. 2,50,000/- which was paid  as  solatium
for the cancellation of that contract, was a revenue receipt
and was chargeable to tax.
there  is a distinction between a contract entered  into  in
the usual course of business and an agency contract.   while
it  may  be  possible  to regard  the  latter  as  merely  a
framework  for  doing business, the former  constitutes  thecommissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 2business  itself, and, therefore, compensation paid for  the
termination  of the former kind of contract must be held  to
be revenue, whereas compensation paid for the termination of
the latter might be capital in character.
it would make no difference in the character of the receipt,
when  it  is  compensation for  cancellation  of  a  trading
contract, whether its performance is to consist of a  single
act or a series of acts spread over a period.
case law reviewed.
van   den   berghs   ltd.  v.  clark,   [1935]   a.c.   431,
distinguished.
judgment:
civil appellate jurisdiction : civil appeal no. 109 of 1954. appeal by special leave from the
judgment and order dated april 21, 1950, of the former nagpur high court in misc. civil case no.
135 of 1949.
r. ganapathy iyer and r. h. dhebar, for the appellant. radhavinod pal, j. m. thakar and i. n.
shroff, for the respondents.
1958. october 7. the judgment of the court was delivered by venkatarama aiyar j.-this is an
appeal against the judgment of the high court of nagpur in a reference under s. 66(1) of the indian
income-tax act (xi of 1922), hereinafter referred to as the act, and the point that is raised for our
determination is whether a sum of rs. 2,50,000 received by the respondent on august 2, 1941, is
chargeable to income- tax. while, according to the department, the amount in question is a revenue
receipt liable to be included in the chargeable income, according to the respondent it is capital
receipt not liable to tax. the appellate tribunal held, affirming the decisions of the income-tax
officer and the appellate assistant commissioner, that the amount in question was a trading
receipt, and was income liable to be assessed. on the application of the respondent, it referred the
following question for the decision of the high court: " whether in the circumstances of the case the
sum of rs. 2,50,000 received by the assessee as damages or compensation for the premature
termination of the contract of 9th may 1940 is income assessable within the meaning of the indian
income-tax act."
the reference was heard by sen and deo, jj., who held, disagreeing with the tribunal, that the sum
of rs. 2,50,000 was a capital receipt in the hands of the respondent, and that it, was not liable to be
taxed. the appellant then filed an application under s. 66(a)(2) of the act for a certificate to appeal
to this court, but that was dismissed, the learned judges holding that the law on the subject was well
settled. the appellant thereafter applied to this court for special leave under art. 136, and the same
was granted, and hence this appeal.
the question whether a receipt is capital or income has frequently come up for determination before
the courts. various rules have been enunciated as furnishing a key to the solution of the question,
but as often observed by the highest authorities, it is not possible to lay down any single test ascommissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 3infallible or any single criterion as decisive in the determination of the question, which must
ultimately depend on the facts of the particular case, and the authorities bearing on the question are
valuable only as indicating the matters that have to be taken into account in reaching a decision.
vide van den berghs ltd. v. clark (1). that, however, is not to say that the question is one of fact,
for, as observed in davies (h. m. inspector of taxes) v. the shell company of china ltd. (2) " these
questions between capital and income, trading profit or no trading profit, are questions which,
though they may depend no doubt to a very great extent on the particular facts of each case, do
involve a conclusion of law to be drawn from those facts ". vide also the observations of lord
greene, m. r. in rustproof metal window co., ltd. v. commissioners of inland revenue (3). that
being so, we must first examine the facts of the present -case, and then consider whether on those
facts and in the light of the applicable principles, the sum of rs. 2,50,000 received by the
respondent is a capital or a revenue receipt.
the respondent is a businessman whose trading activities run in several channels. he is a railway
contractor; he runs a rice mill and a sugar factory; he is a supplier of limestone and dolomite. it is
with the last of these businesses that we are concerned in these proceedings. the respondent had
acquired a quarry at paraghat and had been himself working it and selling limestone quarried out of
it to, among others, a company called the bengal iron company, ltd. on january 5, 1935, the said
company entered into an agreement with the respondent for the purchase of all its requirements of
limestone and dolomite from (1) [1935] a.c. 431. (2) (1951) 32 tax cas. 133 151. (3) (1947) 29 tax
cas. 243, 266.
the latter at rates specified therein, and these rates were subsequently modified by another
agreement between the parties dated december 21, 1935. in 1936 the company went into
liquidation, and its assets and liabilities were taken over by another company called the indian iron
and steel company, ltd. under a scheme of amalgamation dated september 8, 1936. this company
continued to purchase limestone and dolomite from the respondent for some time, but later on,
finding that the rates were uneconomic owing to increase in the railway freight, it decided to
purchase its requirements from other sources, and by notice dated may 29, 1939, informed the
respondent accordingly. thereupon, the respondent filed suit no. 211 of 1940 in the high court of
calcutta for specific performance of the contract dated january 5, 1935, as modified on december
21, 1935, and for an injunction restraining the indian iron and steel company, ltd. from purchasing
limestone or dolomite from any person other than the plaintiff, and on march 13, 1940, an
injunction in those terms was actually issued against the company.
thereafter, the company and the respondent entered into an agreement in settlement of all the
disputes between them, and the same was embodied in a document dated may 9, 1940. as it is this
document that forms the source for the payment of rs. 2,50,000 to the respondent, it is necessary to
refer to the terms thereof in some detail. under this agreement, the respondent was to work a
quarry of the company at a place called gangapur for a period of 25 years and to supply the
limestone quarried therefrom to the company according to its requirements. this quarry, it should
be stated, was situated near kulti where the company carried on its smelting operations, and
obviously it would reduce the working expenses, if limestone required therefor could be got from
gangapur. there were, however, no facilities in gangapur railway station for transporting the goodscommissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 4from the quarry, and so it was arranged that the authorities should be moved for permission to
construct a siding at gangapur, and that the cost thereof should be borne by the company. it was
expected that it would take 18 months before the siding could be completed, and it was agreed that
during that period the respondent was to be paid rs. 4,000 every month. thereafter, the respondent
was to be paid at the rate of rs. 2-9-0 per ton of limestone which might be loaded in the railway
wagons to be arranged for by the company. the working of the quarry was left entirely in the hands
of the respondent. it was he that was to purchase the machinery and the appliances necessary for
quarrying. he was to engage his own workmen and put up all the requisite superstructures. after the
limestone was raised from the quarry, he was to get it cleaned and tendered merchantable, and it
was thereafter to be loaded in the wagon. there are two clauses in the agreement to which reference
might be made. under cl. 6, the respondent agreed " to supply to the company such other quantities
of limestone, if any, as the company may order besides kulti requirements ". clause 13 of the
agreement enjoined that the respondent was not to engage, during the subsistence of the agreement,
in any other contract business for the working of any quarry within an area of 20 miles from the
company's quarry, but this was subject to the proviso that the respondent was free to work any
quarry belonging to and held by him.
to continue the narration, the railway authorities did not agree to the construction at gangapur of a
siding and a loopline to the quarry, and so it became impossible to carry out the agreement in the
manner contemplated by the parties. it is in this situation that the parties came together, and on
august 2,1941, entered into a new agreement and it is with this that we are directly concerned in this
appeal. the agreement recites that the company feeling difficulty in working their mines referred to
in the contract dated may 9, 1940, made a proposal for termination of the said contract on certain
terms, and that was agreed to. the terms of the agreement are (1) that the company should pay " rs.
2,50,000 to the sellers as solatium besides the monthly instalments of rs. 4,000 ", remaining
unpaid under the contract dated may 9, 1940; (2) that the company should take all the limestone
required for its furnaces at kulti from the respondent for a period of 12 years on terms and
conditions set out in an agreement; (3) that the respondent was to be appointed the loading
contractors of the company for loading all iron ore at monoharpore for a period of 12 years from
january 1, 1942, on the terms and conditions specified in a separate agreement. pursuant to this
agreement, the respondent was paid a sum of rs. 2,50,000 and the two agreements relating to the
purchase of limestone and the loading of iron ore at monoharpore were also executed. the balance
due on account of monthly payment of rs. 4,000 provided in the agreement of may 9, 1940, was
also duly paid. now, on these facts, the question is whether the sum of rs. 2,50,000 received by the
respondent was capital or revenue.
before discussing the principles applicable to the facts as stated above, it is necessary to deal with a
contention raised on the facts of the case on behalf of the respondent. dr. radha binode pal, who
appeared for him, argued that for the purpose of carrying out the agreement dated january 5, 1935,
the respondent had executed works of a capital nature such as construction of quarters, tenements
and the like, and had incurred expenses exceeding rs. 4 lakhs -on that account, that all this had to
be thrown away when the if quarry at paraghat had to be abandoned, and the sum of rs. 2,50,000
was really a reimbursement of the amount spent by him as above and was therefore a respondent,
the position in law would no doubt be as contended for by him. but have those facts beencommissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 5established ? in his statement before the income-tax officer, the respondent merely stated that the
amount in question was paid as consideration for the termination of the contract of 1935 and not of
1940, and it is pointed out by the tribunal that the respondent did not substantiate even this
assertion. there was no allegation that capital expenses had been incurred in the execution of the
contract of 1935, and that the amount in question was paid as compensation therefor;
nor is there any evidence on that question. in deed, when it is remembered that the quarry at
paraghat had been abandoned before the contract dated may 9, 1940, was entered into, it is difficult
to imagine how any amount paid as compensation for the cancellation of that contract can have any
connection with expenses incurred with reference to that quarry. we must hold that the sum of rs.
2,50,000 was not paid as compensation for expenses thrown away and cannot be held to be a capital
receipt on that account. now, the contention on behalf of the appellant is that the contract dated
may 9, 1940, was one entered into by the respondent in the ordinary course of his business, that the
sum of rs. 2,50,000 was paid admittedly as solatium for the cancellation of that contract, that the
payment really represents the profits which the respondent could have made, had the contract been
performed, and that it is therefore a revenue receipt; and a number of authorities were quoted in
support of this contention. we shall now refer to the more important of them. id short bros. ltd. v.
the commissioners of inland revenue (1), the facts were that the appellant company which was
carrying on business as shipbuilders had entered into a contract to build two steamers and later on,
agreed to its cancellation on receipt of a sum of pound 1,00,000. the question was whether this was
a capital or revenue receipt. rowlatt, j., held that it was merely a receipt in a going concern and was
revenue, and that was affirmed by the court of appeal, lord hanworth, m.r., observing that such a
contract as the one before him was liable in the ordinary course of business to be altered or
terminated on terms and the payment of pound 1,00,000 in settlement of the rights under the
contract was an adjustment made between the appellants and their clients in the ordinary course of
business. similar observations are to be found in the judgment of sargant, l. j. and lawrence, l. j.
it may be noted on the facts of the present case that the agreement of january 5, 1935, was modified
on december 21, 1935, and the disputes which arose with reference thereto (1) (1927) 12 tax cas.
955.
were settled by the agreement of may 9, 1940, which was, in turn, replaced by agreement dated
august 2, 1941. the agreements dated may 9, 1940, and august 2, 1941, could therefore be properly
said to be adjustments made in the ordinary course of business.
in the commissioners of inland revenue v. the north fleet coal and ballast co., ltd. (1), the
respondent company which was the owner of a chalk quarry had entered into a contract with a
purchaser for the supply of certain quantity of chalk for a period of ten years. after some time, the
purchaser wanted to be relieved from the contract, and the respondent agreed to its termination on
receipt, of pound 3,000. the point for decision was whether that was a capital or a revenue receipt.
in holding that it was the latter, rowlatt, j., observed:
" if the contract had gone forward those sums would have come into profits every year and now that
they are represented by a commutation, so far as that is concerned, the point seems to be concluded
by short's case (2) ". one of the contentions urged on behalf of the assessee was that the contractcommissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 6being for a term was a capital asset, that the effect of the subsequent agreement terminating it on
payment of pound 3,000 was in substance to assign the unexpired portion of the contract for a
consideration, and that it would be a capital receipt on the principle laid down in john smith & son
v. moore(1). in repelling this contention, rowlatt, j., observed :
"these contracts are not being sold. they are not being even extinguished really for this purpose.
what is happening is that the profits under them are being taken; something is being taken in
respect of the profits of them. that is the position. this sum represents the profits of the company
-on the contracts, treating them as contracts which nationally have earned or are going to earn a
profit." and the decision in john smith & son v. moore was distinguished.
(1) (1927) 12 tax cas. 1102.
(2) (1927) 12 tax cas. 955.
(3) (1921) 12 tax cas. 266, in john smith & son v. moore (1), it may be stated that the executors
sold some outstanding contracts for the supply of coal to the son of the testator for a consideration,
and it was held that the payment made by the son for the purchase of the contracts was in his hands
a capital expense. the payment was not given by one party to a contract to the other in cancellation
of the agreement but by a stranger to the contract to one of the parties thereto for an assignment of
his rights thereunder. in jessee robinson & sons v. the commissioners of inland revenue (2), the
appellant had entered into two contracts for the sale of' yarn. the purchaser cancelled the contracts
and paid pound 12,500 in settlement of the claims. the contention of the appellant was that this
payment was not a trading receipt or profit arising from his trade. in rejecting this contention,
rowlatt, j. observed:
" it seems to me that there is no reason why the sum received in that respect for breach of contract is
not a sum which is part of the receipts of the business for which that contract was made."
examining the facts of the present case in the light of the above decisions, the question to be
considered is whether the contract dated may 9, 1940, was entered into by the respondent in the
usual course of his business. if it was, then the amount paid for the termination of the contract must
be held to be a trading receipt. that the respondent has been carrying on business in the production
and supply of limestone is amply established. the record shows that he had been supplying
limestone and dolomite to the bengal iron company, ltd., from about the year 1920 and that the
contracts of 1935 were entered into only in the carrying on of that business. vide para. 4 in the plaint
in suit no. 211 of 1940 already referred to. the contract of may 9, 1940, was made in settlement of
the rights under those contracts. it is to be noted that under the agreement dated august 2, 1941,
under which he received a sum of rs. 2,50,000, he also secured a contract for the supply of
limestone for a period of 12 years. on these facts, it is impossible to (1) (1921) 12 tax cas. 266.
(2) (1929) 12 tax cas. 1241.commissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 7come to any conclusion other than that the contract in question was entered into by the respondent
in the ordinary course of his business. the learned judges in the-court below observe that the
assessee was not a dealer in, though he was a supplier of, limestone. this appears to us to be a
distinction without a difference. moreover, it would be wholly immaterial for the present purpose
whether the respondent was a dealer in or supplier of limestone, as, in either view, he would be
carrying on business and the contract in question would be one entered into in the carrying on of
that business. we should also observe that the statement that the respondent was only a supplier
but not a dealer in limestone does riot appear to be quite accurate on the facts. under cl. 13 of the
agreement dated may 9, 1940, the respondent had the right to work other quarries of his own, and
the evidence shows that he did supply limestone so quarried to other purchasers. in support of the
judgment of the court below, learned counsel for the respondent urged the following contentions :
(1) the contract dated may 9, 1940, was for a period of 25 years of which more than 23 years had
still to run at the time of the settlement, and it was therefore an asset of an enduring character,
capital in character, and the compensation paid therefor was a capital receipt. (2) the true character
of the agreement was that it brought into existence an arrangement which would enable the
respondent to carry on a business and was not itself any business and any payment made for the
termination of such an agreement is a capital receipt.
(3) the business which was to be carried on pursuant to the contract was of a specialised character,
that there was no general market for limestone and dolomite, that the contract in question formed
practically the entire business of the respondent and the compensation paid for the closure of that
business would not be a revenue receipt but a capital receipt on account of sterilisation of a capital
asset. it is argued by dr. radha binode pal that the features stated above were not present in the
contracts which came up for consideration in the decisions cited for the appellant, and that they are
therefore distinguishable, and he relied on other authorities as applicable to the fact,,; of this case.
these contentions and the authorities cited in support thereof must now be considered.
(1) is the receipt of rs. 2,50,000 a capital receipt for the reason that it was compensation for the
settlement of a contract which had a long life before it ? the argument of the respondent is that
there is in the income-tax law a well-defined distinction between fixed capital and circulating capital
(vide john smith & son v. moore)(1), that where there is a contract the performance of which is to
be not once and for all but spread over a period of years, it is in the nature of a fixed capital and a
payment on account of it must be held to be capital receipt. reliance is placed in support of this
contention on the decisions in commissioner of income-tax v. shaw wallace & co. (2) and barr,
crombie & co. ltd. v. commissioners of inland revenue (3) and certain observations in kelsall
parsons & co. v. commissioners of inland revenue (4) and the commissioner of income-tax and
excess profits tax, madras v. the south india pictures ltd., karaikudi (5). in income-tax
commissioner v. shaw wallace. & co. (2), the respondent company had been acting for several
years as the distributing agents of two oil companies. in 1927-28, these companies decided to make
their own distribution arrangements and accordingly terminated the agency of the respondent and
paid compensation therefor. the question was whether this amount was a revenue receipt in the
hands of the respondent. it was held by the privy council that it was a capital receipt, because it
represented compensation paid for cessation of business, not profits earned in the carrying on of it.
in barr, crombie & co. ltd. v. commissioners of inland revenue (3), the facts were that (1) (1921)commissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 812 tax cas. 266.
(3) (1945) 26 tax cas. 4o6.
(5) [1956] s.c.r. 223.
(2) (1932) l.r. 59 i.a. 2o6.
(4) (1938) 21 tax cas. 608.
under an agreement dated may 25, 1937, the appel]ant had been appointed manager of a shipping
company for a period of 15 years, and one of the terms of the agreement was that if the company
went into liquidation, the entire remuneration for the remaining period -was payable forthwith. on
novem- ber 5, 1942, the company went into liquidation, and a sum of pound 16,306 16s. 11d. was
paid to the appellant as its remuneration for the period of about 8 years which was still to run. on a
question as to whether this was taxable as a revenue receipt, it was held that as virtually the whole of
the asets of the appellant company consisted of the managing agency agreement, a payment for its
extinction was a capital receipt and was therefore not taxable. distinguishing the decision in
kelsall's case (1) where compensation paid for the termination of an agency agreement was held to
be a revenue receipt, the lord president normand observed: (at page 411).
" here we are not dealing with a single payment in return for the surrender of the prospect of
making profits in the final year of the agreement, but with a payment for the surrender of an
agreement while there was still a substantial period-indeed, more than half of the period of the
agreement-to run ".
lord moncrieff agreeing with this conclusion observed that " so far from this being a prepayment of
future remuneration for services, this was, if regard be had to 'the substance of the matter a price
paid upon the purchase and sale of the main asset of a business."
in kelsall's case (1), the assessee carried on business as commission agents and acquired a number
of agencies in the course of that business. one of these agencies which was for a period of three
years was cancelled at the end of the second year on payment of pound 1,500 as compensation. the
question was whether this was a capital or a revenue receipt. in holding that it was the latter, the
lord president, normand observed that the business of the appellant was to acquire as many
agencies as it could, that it was incidental to that agency that it should be modified, altered or
discharged (1) (1938) 21 tax cas. 6o8.
and that as the period outstanding was one year, it could not be said that the appellant was parting
with an enduring asset of the business. lord fleming in agreeing with this conclusion stated that he
attached importance to the fact that the agreement had only one year to run and that different
considerations might &rise if the outstanding period was considerable.commissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 9" a different case would have arisen for decision he observed, (at p. 622) " if the agreement had been
terminated when it had still, say, a period of 10 years to run. a payment made in respect of a loss to
be sustained over a period of years may well have a different character from a payment made in
respect of a loss to be sustained in the year in which the payment is received."
all these cases were considered by this court in the commissioner of income-tax and excess profits
tax, madras v. the south india pictures ltd., karaikudi (1). there, the assessee was carrying on
business in the distribution of films, and in the course of such business entered into three contracts
dated september 17, 1941, july 16, 1942, and may 5, 1945, with a company called the jupiter
pictures, ltd., for the production and distribution of three films for a period of 5 years. on october
31, 1945, the assessee and the jupiter pictures, ltd., entered into an agreement terminating the
contracts in consideration of a payment of rs. 26,000 as compensation to the assessee. the question
having been raised whether this was a capital or revenue receipt, this court held that it was the
latter and was liable to be taxed, and the decision in barr, crombie & co. ltd. v. commissioners of
inland revenue (2) was distinguished on the ground that there the whole trade of the assessee was
built on the agreement dated may 25, 1937, that it was a fundamental asset of the assessee's
business, and that the payment on account of it was a capital receipt. now, it is the contention of the
respondent that the present case is governed by the principles laid down in the above decisions and
not those enunciated in the authorities cited for the appellant, and that the (1) [1956] s.c.r. 223.
(2) (1945) 26 tax cas. 406.
payment of rs. 2,50,000 as compensation on account of the agreement dated may 9, 1940, falls
within income-tax commissioner v. shaw wallace & co. (1) and barr, crombie & co. ltd. v.
commissioners of inland revenue (2 ) rather than kelsall's case (3) and the commissioner of
income-tax and excess profits tax, madras v. the south india pictures ltd., karaikudi (4) because
the contract dated may 9, 1940, formed practically the only business of the respondent and the
contract had at the time of the settlement still a period of 23 years to run. it will be seen that the
receipts, the chargeability of which was in question in the decisions cited for the respondent, were
all payments made as compensation for the termination of agency contracts, whereas we are
concerned with an amount paid as solatium for the cancellation of a contract entered into by a
businessman in the ordinary course of his business, and that, in our judgment, makes all the
difference in the character of the receipt. in an agency contract, the actual business consists in the
dealings between the principal and his customers, and the work of the agent is only to bring about
that business. in other words, what he does is not the business itself but something which is
intimately and directly linked up with it. it is therefore possible to view the agency as the apparatus
which leads to business rather than as the business itself on the analogy of the agreements in van
den berghs ltd. v. clark (5). considered in this light, the agency right can be held to be of the nature
of a capital asset invested in business. but this cannot be said of a contract entered into in the
ordinary course of business. such a contract is part of the business itself, not anything outside it as
is the agency, and any receipt on account of such a contract can only be a trading receipt.
that there is a distinction between an agency agreement and a contract made in the usual course of
business will further be clear, if we have regard to one (1) (1932) l.r. 59 i.a. 206. (2) (1945) 26 taxcommissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 10cas. 406. (3) (1938) 21 tax cas. 608. (4) [1956] s.c.r. 223. (5) [1935] a. c. 431.
of the reasons on which the conclusion that compensation paid for cancellation of agency rights is a
capital receipt is sometimes rested. it is that, in substance, the agent assigns the agreement to the
principal and the compensation is price paid therefor. vide the observations of lord moncrieff in
barr, crombie & co. ltd. v. commissioners of inland revenue (1) at page 413 already quoted. it no
doubt sounds somewhat strange that an arrangement between parties to a contract settling claims
thereunder should be regarded as an assignment of the rights of one of them to the other, but it at
least emphasises that the agreement is to be regarded as a capital asset of the agent, which is
saleable. such a concept will be out of place with reference to a contract entered into in the course of
business. any payment made for the non-performance or cancellation of such a contract can only be
damages or compensation and cannot, in law or fact, be regarded as an assignment of the rights
under the contract. a claim for damages is, in law, incapable of being transferred, though the benefit
of a contract could be assigned while it is subsisting, and such assignment can only be in favour of
third persons, not in favour of the other party to the contract, in which case it will be a new contract.
reference may in this connection be made to the observations of rowlatt, j., in the commissioners
of inland revenue v. the northfleet coal and ballast co., ltd. (2) already quoted, that such
contracts were not sold.
if, then, contracts entered into in the course of business cannot, unlike agency contracts, be
regarded as ,capital assets of the business, would it make any difference in their character that they
are to be in operation for a period ? on principle, it is difficult to see why it should. if under the
terms of a contract a businessman a is to supply goods, let us say, 100 bales of yarn, on a particular
day and he does that, the price received by him therefor will be a revenue receipt. and in the above
case if the purchaser cancels the contract and pays damages to the seller, that would also be a
revenue receipt. if under the same (1) (1945) 26 tax cas. 406 (2) (1927) 12 tax cas. 1102.
contract a is to deliver the bales in four quarterly instalments, and he does so and receives the price
in four instalments, all the receipts would be revenue receipts. and if after one instalment is
delivered, the purchaser cancels the contract as regards future instalments and pays compensation
therefor to the seller, such payment will undoubtedly be a revenue receipt. if the contract is that a is
to supply whatever goods are ordered by the purchaser during a certain period, let us say, 10 years,
the price received for the goods ordered and delivered will be revenue receipt. now, if the purchaser
under this contract puts an end to the contract after some time, say, at the end of two years and pays
compensation for the breach of the contract as regards the remaining period, does the receipt
thereof become a capital receipt ? it sounds illogical so to hold. how does it affect the true position,
whether the contracting parties agree to carry on business in the sale and purchase of goods for a
stated period on terms settled between them, or whether they enter into a succession of contracts for
that purpose ?
two decisions have been quoted before us as showing that payments under a contract entered into
in the ordinary course of business would be revenue receipts, even though the agreement may be for
a period. in the commissioner of inland revenue v. the northfleet coal and ballst co., ltd. (1)
cited above, the contract was for the supply of chalk for a period of ten years, and the compensationcommissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 11paid was for the cancellation of the contract for the unexpired period of four years, and it was held to
be a trading receipt. in shove (h. m. inspector of taxes) v. dura manufacturing co. ltd. (2), the
respondent company had introdticed company a to company b, as the result of which the former
obtained a remunerative business with the latter. in return for this service, a agreed to pay the
respondent a commission on the business so obtained. later on, this agreement was terminated on
payment of a sum of pound 1,500 by a to the, respondent. the question was whether this was a
revenue (1) (1927) 12 tax cas. 1102. (2) (1941) 23 tax cas. 779,
783. receipt. in answering it in the affirmative, lawrence, j., observed:
" reliance was also placed on certain dicta in the court of session in kelsall parsons & co. v.
commissioners of inland revenue, at pages 620, 622 and 624, which suggest that if the contract
cancelled has more than one year to run, the sum received for its cancellation way be capital. the
learned judges who expressed this view did not say that such sum must be capital. they were
dealing with a contract different from the present, namely, an agency contract, which constituted a
very large part of the taxpayer's business ".
" in view of the decision in short bros., ltd. v. commissioners of inland revenue and in
commissioners of inland revenue v. northfleet coal and ballast co. ltd. and the differences of
facts, i do not feel that those dicta ought to be applied to the present case."
in our opinion, therefore, when once it is found that a contract was entered into in the ordinary
course of business, any compensation received for its termination would be a revenue receipt,
irrespective of whether its performance was to consist of a single act or a series of acts spread over a
period, and in this respect, it differs from an agency agreement.
in holding that compensation paid on the cancellation of a trading contract differs in character from
compensation paid for cancellation of an agency contract, we should not be understood as deciding
that the latter must always, and as a matter of law be held to be a capital receipt' such a conclusion
will be directly opposed to the decisions in kelsall's case (1) and the commissioner of income-tax
and excess profits tax, madras v. the south india pictures ltd., karatkudi (2). the fact is that an
agency contract which has the character of a capital asset in the hands of one person may assume
the character of a trading receipt in the hands of another, as, for example, when the agent is found to
make a trade of acquiring agencies and dealing with them. the principle was (1) (1938) 21 tax cas.
608.
(2) [1956] s.c.r. 223.
thus stated by romer, l. j., in golden horse shoe, (new) ltd. v. thurgood (1):
" the determining factor must be the nature of the trade in which the asset is employed. the land
upon which a manufacturer carries on his business is part of his fixed capital.. the land with which a
dealer in real estate carries od. his business is part of his circulating capital. the machinery with
which a manufacturer makes the articles that he sells is part of his fixed capital. the machinery thatcommissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 12a dealer in machinery buys and sells is part of his circulating capital, as is the coal that a coal
merchant buys and sells in the course of his trade. so, too, is the coal that a manufacturer of gas
buys and from which he extracts his gas."
therefore, when a question arises whether a payment of compensation for termination of an agency
is a capital or a revenue receipt, it would have to be considered whether the agency was in the nature
of capital asset in the hands of the assessee, or whether it was only part of his stock-in- trade. thus,
in barr, crombie & son ltd. v. commissioners of inland revenue (2), the agency was found to be
practically the sole business of the assessee, and the receipt of compensation on account of it was
accordingly held to be a capital receipt, while in kelsall's case (3) the agency which was terminated
was one of several agencies held by the assessee and the compensation amount received therefor
was hold to be a revenue receipt, and that was also the case in the commissioner of income-tax and
excess profits tax, madras v. the south india pictures ltd., karaikudi (4). it is, however,
unnecessary to further elaborate this point, as we are concerned in this appeal, not with an agency
agreement but with a contract entered into in the ordinary course of business, and, in our judgment,
compensation received on account of such a contract must be held to be a revenue receipt. (2) the
above discussion answers to a large extent the contention of the respondent that the contract (1)
(1933) 18 tax cas. 280, 300.
(3) (1938) 21 tax cas. 6o8.
(2) (1945) 26 tax cas. 4o6.
(4) [1956] s.c.r. 223.
dated 'may 9, 1940' was merely a framework of his business and not the business itself, and that a
receipt on account of it must be treated as a capital receipt. the decision relied on in support of this
contention is van den berghs ltd. v. clark (1). there, two companies, one english and the other
dutch, which were engaged in the manufacture and sale of margarine entered into certain
agreements, the object of which was to avoid competition and to augment their profits. an elaborate
scheme was devised under which the two companies were to carry on their business indepen- dently
but "in friendly alliance" and in accordance with the scheme; and the profits were to be shared
between the two companies in certain proportions. the agreements were to be in operation till 1940,
but differences arose between the parties in the working of the scheme and the "alliance " was
terminated in 1927, the dutch company paying to the english company a sum of pound 4,50,000 as
compensation. the question was as to the character of this receipt, whether it was a capital or a
revenue receipt, and it was held by the house of lords that it was a capital receipt and not taxable.
now, it will be seen that the contracts which were the source of the receipt in question did not in
themselves constitute the business which yielded the profits to the two companies. those profits
were derived by them from the manufacture and sale of margarine, and there was nothing in the
agreements providing that the companies were to join in the manufacture and sale of the margarine.
the position under the agreement is thus stated by lord macmillan, who delivered the leading
judgment:commissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 13" the three agreements which the appellants consented to cancel were not ordinary commercial
contracts made in the course of carrying on their trade; they were not contracts for the disposal of
their products, or for the engagement of agents or other employees necessary for the conduct of
their business; nor were they merely agreements as to how their (1) (1935) a.c. 431.
trading profits when earned should be distributed as between the contracting parties. on the
contrary the cancelled agreements related to the whole structure of the appellants' profit-making
apparatus. they regulated the appellants' activities, defined what they might and what they might
not do, and affected the whole conduct of their business." thus, the agreements in question were
intended to ensure that the business in margarine was carried on to the best advantage, but did not,
in themselves, form part of the business. they were merely collateral to it. for the reasons given in
discussing the nature of agency agreements, the agreements between the two companies must be
regarded as not pertaining to the trading activities, which yielded profits, and the payment on
account of those agreements must be held to be a capital receipt. but these considerations would be
inapplicable to the agreement, with which we are concerned. the business which the respondent
was to carry on and which was to yield profits to him was the very business to which the agreement
relates. it is under this very agreement that he was to be paid rs. 2-9-0 per ton of limestone loaded
by him, and the business which he had to do to earn the amount was to raise and supply limestone
as provided in the agreement. there is here no profit-making apparatus set up by the agreement
&part from the business which is to be carried on under it. we are accordingly unable to agree that
the present case is governed' 'by the decision in van den berghs ltd. v. clark (3) it remains to deal
with the contention of the respondent that the business which he was to have carried on under the
contract dated may 9, 1950, was practically the entirety of his trading activities, and that the
termination of such a contract is tantamount to stopping his doing business and the compensation
paid therefor is a capital receipt. reliance is placed in support of this argument on the decision in
the glenboig union fireclay co. ltd. v. the commissioners of inland revenue (2). now, to
appreciate the (1) (1935) a.c. 431.
(2) (1922) 12 tax cas. 427.
truer position, it is necessary to bear in mind the distinc- tion between compensation on account of
business carried on under an agreement with a third party when that is terminated, and
compensation which is received on account of a business which the assessee is prevented from
carrying on by a third person in exercise of an overriding power. in the former case, the payment
would in general be a trading receipt referable to the business activities carried on or to be carried
on under the agreement and would be taxable as a revenue receipt. there may be exceptions to this.
a familiar instance is when the parties agree, as part of the contract to do business, that one of them
shall not carry on similar business for a stated period after the termination of the contract, and a
compensation is paid therefor. that has been held to be a capital receipt. vide beak v. robson (1).
the reason is that it is a payment made not on account of profits which might have been earned in
the carrying on of the business but as solatium for not carrying on the business. a payment made in
a similar covenant to operate during the period of the contract, however, has been held to be a
revenue receipt, because it arises out of the carrying on of the business. vide thompson v.
magnesium elektron, ltd. (2). it might also happen that one of the parties to the contract mightcommissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 14have, in the carrying out -thereof, incurred expenses of a capital character and as a result of the
cancellation of the contract, those expenses would have been thrown away. a payment made on
account of those expenses would bear the character of a capital receipt. but apart from these and
similar in-stances, it might, in general, be stated that payments made in settlement of rights under a
trading contract are trading receipts and are assessable to revenue. but where a person who is
carrying on business is prevented from doing so by an external authority in exercise of a paramount
power and is awarded compensation therefor, whether that receipt is a capital receipt or a revenue
receipt will depend upon whether it is compensation for injury inflicted on a capital asset or on a (1)
(1942) 25 tax cas. 33.
(2) (1943) 26 tax cas. 1.
stock-in-trade. the decision in the glenboig union fireclay co. ltd. v. the commissioners of
inland revenue (1) applies to this category of cases. there, ,he assessee was carrying on business in
the manufacture of fire clay goods and had, for the performance of that business, acquired a fire clay
field on lease. the caledonian railway which passed over the field prohibited the assessee from
excavating the field within a, certain distance of the rails, and paid compensation therefor in
accordance with the provisions of a statute. it was held by the house of lords that this was a capital
receipt and was not taxable on the ground that the compensation was really the price paid " for
sterilising the asset from which otherwise profit might have been obtained ". that is say, the fire clay
field was a capital asset which was to be utilised for the carrying on of the business of manufacturing
fire clay goods and when the assessee was prohibited from exploiting the field, it was an injury
inflicted on his capital asset. where, however, the compensation is referable to injury inflicted on
the stock- in-trade, it would be a revenue receipt. vide the commissioners of inland revenue v.
newcastle breweries ltd. (2). the principle of these decisions has no application where the
compensation paid is in respect of rights arising under a trading contract. a payment made in
settlement of that contract is an adjustment of the rights under that contract, and must be referred
to the profits which could be made in the carrying out of that contract.
in the present case, the contract dated may 9, 1940, was simply an agreement to carry on business.
in settlement of that contract, rs. 2,50,000 was paid to the respondent. that was not a payment on
account of any capital expenditure incurred by him in the execution of the contract. that indeed was
the point sought to be raised by the respondent, but therein he has failed. it is also to be noted that
at no time was he prevented from carrying on business. clause 6 of the agreement dated may 9,
1940, contemplates that the respondent was to carry on generally the business (1) (1922) 12 tax cas.
427.
(2) (1927) 12 tax cas. 927.
of supply of limestone even apart from his work in the gangapur quarry, and the agreement dated
august 2, 1941, provides for his supplying limestone for the furnaces at kulti for a period of 12 years
and for loading iron at monoharpore for a like period. there was therefore at no time any agreement
which operated as a bar to the carrying on of business by the respondent.commissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 15on a consideration of all the facts established, we are of opinion that the receipt of rs. 2,50,000 by
the respondent is a revenue receipt. and is chargeable to tax. in the result, the appeal is allowed, the
judgment of the high court set aside and the order of the tribunal restored. the respondent will
pay the costs of the appellant throughout.
appeal allowed.commissioner of income-tax, ... vs rai bahadur jairam valji and ... on 7 october, 1958
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175472/ 16