supreme court of india
the commissioner of income-tax, ... vs sri meenakshi mills ltd. & ors on 25 october, 1966
equivalent citations: 1967 air 819, 1967 scr (1) 934
author: v ramaswami
bench: ramaswami, v.
           petitioner:
the commissioner of income-tax, madras
        vs.
respondent:
sri meenakshi mills ltd. & ors.
date of judgment:
25/10/1966
bench:
ramaswami, v.
bench:
ramaswami, v.
shah, j.c.
bhargava, vishishtha
citation:
 1967 air  819            1967 scr  (1) 934
 citator info :
 e          1969 sc1160  (5)
 r          1986 sc   1  (4)
 rf         1986 sc1370  (90)
 r          1986 sc1483  (4)
act:
indian income-tax act (11 of 1922), s. 42-scope--finding  of
fact  by  tribunal-interference by  high  court,  validity,-
corporate entity, if court can lift veil--
headnote:
the  assessee-companies, carried on business in madurai  and
each  had  a branch at pudukottai, a  former  native  state.
they hold majority share in a bank which, too, had its  head
office  at madurai and branch at pudukottai.  t, who  was  a
shareholder  of  the  bank, was the  moving  figure  in  the
assessee-companies.  the assessees borrowed moneys from  the
madurai  head  office of the bank on the security  of  fixed
deposits made by the assessees' branches with the pudukottai
branch  of  the bank.  the loans were far in excess  of  the
available  profits  at pudukottai.  the  income-tax  officer
held that the borrowings in british india on the security of
the   fixed   deposits  made  at  pudukottai   amounted   tothe commissioner of income-tax, ... vs sri meenakshi mills ltd. & ors on 25 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/503166/ 1constructive  remittance of the profits by the  branches  of
the assessee-companies to their head office in india  within
the meaning of s. 4 of the income-tax act, and this view the
appellate  assistant  commissioner  upheld.   the  assessees
appealed  to  the trbunal which took note  that  the  branch
whether  of  the assessee of the bank constituted  only  one
unit,  and  the establishment of the branch of the  bank  at
pudukottai was intended to help the financial operations  of
t  in  the  concerns in which he was  interested.,  and  the
pudukottai   branch  of  the  bank  had  transmitted   funds
deposited  by the assessees for enabling the madurai  branch
to  advance  loans  at interest to  the  assessees  and  the
transmission  of  the funds was made with the  knowledge  of
assessees.   the  tribunal  held  that  the  assessees  were
rightly assessed.  in reference the high court answered  the
question  in  favour  of the assessees holding  it  was  not
established  that  there  was any  arrangement  between  the
assessees  and the bank whether at pudukottai or at  madurai
for transference of moneys from pudukottai branch to madurai
and the facts on record did not establish that there was any
transfer  of  funds between pudukottai and madurai  for  the
purpose  of  advancing  moneys to  the  assessees,  and  the
transactions  represented ordinary banking transactions  and
there  was nothing to show that the amounts placed in  fixed
deposits  in  the branch were intended to and were  in  fact
transferred  to head office for the purpose of lending  them
out  to  the depositor himself.  in appeals by  the  commis-
sioner, this court,
held: the appeals must be allowed
the high court erred in law in interfering with the findings
of  the appellate tribunal.  in a reference the  high  court
must  accept the findings of fact reached by  the  appellate
tribunal and it is for the party who applied for a reference
to challenge those findings of fact first by an  application
under s. 66(1).  if the party failed to file an application,
under  s.  66(1) expressly raising the  question  about  the
validity of the findings of fact, he is not entitled to urge
before the high court that the findings are vitiated for any
reason. [938 h-939 b]
india  cements ltd. v. commissioner of  income-tax,  madras,
60, i.t.r. 52, relied on.
935
in  the context of the facts as found by the  tribunal,  the
entire  transactions formed part of a basic  arrangement  or
scheme  between the creditor and the debtor that  the  money
should  be brought into british india after it was taken  by
the borrower outside the taxable territory. [940 b-c]
section  42 requires, in the first place, that money  should
have been lent at interest outside the taxable territory, in
the second place, income, profits or gains should accrue  or
arise  directly  or indirectly from such money  so  lent  at
interest,  and in the third place, that the money should  be
brought into the taxable territories in cash or in kind.  ifthe commissioner of income-tax, ... vs sri meenakshi mills ltd. & ors on 25 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/503166/ 2all  these conditions are fulfilled, then the  section  lays
down  that  the  interest shall be  deemed  to  be  interest
accruing or arising within the taxable territories. [939 d]
the provision in s. 42(1), which brings within the scope  of
the  charging  section  interest earned out  of  money  lent
outside, but brought into british india, was not ultra vires
the  indian  legislature on the ground that  it  was  extra-
territorial in operation. [939 f]
the section contemplates the bringing of money into  british
india with the knowledge of the lender and borrower and this
gives rise to a real territorial connection.  this knowledge
must be an integral part of the transaction. [940 a]
a.   h.  wadia  v.  commissioner of  income-tax,  bombay  17
i.t.r. 63, approved.
in  certain exceptional cases the court is entitled to  lift
the veil of corporate entity and pay regard to the  economic
realities  behind the legal facade.  for example, the  court
has  power to disregard the corporate entity if it  is  used
for tax evasion or to circumvent tax obligation. [941 e]
devid  payne & co. ltd. in re, young v. david payne  &  co.,
ltd. [1904] 2 ch.  d. 608. distinguished.
case law referred to.
judgment:
civil appellate jurisdiction : civil appeals nos. 1084 to 1097 of 1965.
appeals by special leave from the judgment and order dated january 8, 1963 of the madras high
court in tax case no. 108 of 1960.
b. sen, a. n. kirpal, s. p. nayyar and r. n. sachthey, for the appellant (in all the appeals).
r. venkataraman and r. ganapathy iyer, for the respondent (in all the appeals).
the judgment of the court was delivered by ramaswami, j. these appeals are brought, by special
leave, from the judgment of the high court of madras dated january 8, 1963 in tax case no. 108 of
1960.
all the three respondents (hereinafter called the aassessee- companies') are public limited
companies engaged in the manufacture and sale of yam at madurai. each of the assessee-companies
had a branch at pudukottai engaged in the production and sale of cotton yarn. the sale-proceeds of
the branches were periodically deposited in the branch of madurai bank ltd. (hereinafter referred to
as the 'bank') at pudukottai a former native state either in the current accounts or fixed deposits
which earned interest for the various assessment years as follows:
assessment years meenakshirajendra saroja mills millsmills rs. rs. rs.the commissioner of income-tax, ... vs sri meenakshi mills ltd. & ors on 25 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/503166/ 3----------------------------------------------------
1946-47 1,08,902 25,511 1947-48 1,18,791 24,953 30,620 1948-49 1,50,017 33,632
36,890 1949-50 42,36941,393 195-0-51 1,27,314 41,957 42,092 the bank aforesaid
was incorporated on february 8, 1943 with thyagaraja chettiar as founder director,
the head office being at madurai. out of 15,000 shares of this bank issued 14,766
were held by thyagaraja chettiar, his two sons and the three assessee-companies as
shown below:
share holding
1. thyagaraja chettiar 1,008
2. manickavasagam 250
3. sundaram 250
4. meenakshi mills 5,972
5. rajendra mills 3,009
6. saroja mills 4,177 all the three assessee companies borrowed moneys from the
madurai branch of the bank and on the security of the fixed deposits made by their
branches with the pudukottai branch of the bank. it is the admitted case that the
loans granted to the assessee-companies were far in excess of the available profits at
pudukottai. in the assessment proceedings of the assessee-companies for the various
years under dispute, the income-tax officer was of the view that the borrowings in
british india on the security of the fixed deposits made at pudukottai amounted to
constructive remittances of the profits by the branches of the assessee-
companies to their head offices in india within the meaning of  s. 4 of the indian
income-tax act, 1922 (hereinafter called the 'act'). accordingly he included the entire
profits of the assessee-companies including the interest receipts from the pudukottai
branches in the assessment of the assessee-companies, since the overdrafts availed of
by the assessee-companies in british india far exceeded the available profits. the
assessee-companies appealed to the appellate assistant commissioner of
income-tax. after examining the constitu-
tion of the assessee-companies and the bank and the figures of deposits and overdrafts, the
appellate assistant commissioner found that the deposits made by the assessee- companies and
other companies closely allied to them formed a substantial part of the total deposits received by the
bank. he was also of the view that the pudukottai branch of the bank had transmitted the funds so
deposited for enabling the madurai branch to advance loans at interest to the assessee-companies
and that the transmissions of the funds were made with the knowledge of the assessee-companiesthe commissioner of income-tax, ... vs sri meenakshi mills ltd. & ors on 25 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/503166/ 4who were major shareholders of the bank. the appellate assistant commissioner also considered
that the pudukottai branch of the bank had no other appreciable transactions except the collection
of funds and on the facts found  s. 42(1) of the act applied to the case. the assessee- companies took
the matter in appeal to the appellate tribunal -which took note of the position that the head office
and the branch-whether of the assessee-companies or of the bank-constituted only one unit and that
thyagraja chettiar occupied a special position in both the concerns and the establishment of the
branch of the bank at pudukottai was intended to help the financial operations of thyagaraja
chettiar in the concerns in which he was interested. after detailed consideration of the deposits and
overdrafts and the inter-branch transactions of the bank the appellate tribunal held that s. 42(1) of
the act was applicable to the facts of the case and that the assessee- companies must be attributed
with the knowledge of the activity of their branches at pudukottai and of the remittances made by
the pudukottai branch of the bank to madurai head office, and that the entire transactions formed
part of an arrangement or scheme.
in the course of its judgment, the appellate tribunal observed as follows:
"even so, it seems to us, we cannot escape the fact that thyagaraja chettiar, his two
sons and the three mills had a preponderant, if not the whole, voice in the creation,
running and management of the bank. we cannot also forget that pudukottai is
neither a cotton producing area nor has a market for cotton; except that it was a
non-taxable territory, there was nothing else to recommend the carrying on of the
business in cotton spinning or weaving there. there is yet another aspect to which
our attention was drawn by the learned counsel for the assessee. that being, a
non-taxable area, there were many very rich men there with an influx of funds to
invest in banks and industries. by the same token, it appears to us it was not
necessary for the madurai bank which was after all a creation of certain people which
started with a small capital of rs. 32,800 to have gone to pudukottai for opening a
branch. if there was an influx of money in pudukottai sup.c.i./66-14 because of the
finances, nobody would have agreed to borrow money from it. at any rate, it is clear it
would have had no field for investment in pudukottai the only source of investment
being outside pudukottai." the appellate tribunal further stated: "but having regard
to the special position of thyagaraja chettiar and the balance sheets of the bank
referred to above and the lack of investments in pudukottai itself of' the moneys
borrowed there, it seems more reasonable to conclude that the bank itself was started
at madurai and a branch of it was opened at pudukottai only with a view to help the
financial operations of thyagaraja chettiar and the mills in which he was vitally
interested."
at the instance of the assessee-companies the appellate tribunal referred the
following question of law for the determination of the high court:
"whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the taxing of the entire
interest earned on the fixed deposits made out of the profits earned in pudukottai by
the assessee's branches in the pudukottai branch of the bank of madurai is correct?"the commissioner of income-tax, ... vs sri meenakshi mills ltd. & ors on 25 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/503166/ 5the high court answered the question in favour of the assessee-companies holding
that it was not established that there was any arrangement between the
assessee-companies and the bank whether at pudukottai or at madurai for
transference of moneys from pudukottai branch to madurai and the facts on record
did not establish that there was any transfer of funds between pudukottai and
madurai for the purpose of advancing moneys to the assessee-companies. the high
court further took the view that the transactions represented ordinary banking
transactions and there was nothing to show that the amounts placed in fixed deposits
in the branch were intended to, and were in fact transferred to head office for the
purpose of lending them out to the depositor himself.
on behalf of the appellant mr. sen submitted at the outset that the high court was not legally
justified in interfering with the findings of fact reached by the appellate tribunal and in concluding
that there was no arrangement or scheme between the lender and the borrower for the transference
of funds from pudukottai to madurai. in our opinion, there is justification for the argument put
forward on behalf of the appellant and the high court erred in law in interfering with the findings of
the appellate tribunal in this case. in india cements ltd., v. commissioner of income-tax,
madras(1) it was pointed out by this court that in a reference the high court must accept the
findings of fact reached by the appellate tribunal and it is for the party who. applied for a reference
to challenge those findings of fact first by an application under s. 66(1). if the party concerned has
failed to file an application under s. 66(1) expressly raising the question about the validity of the
findings of fact, he is not entitled to urge before the high court that the findings are vitiated for any
reason. we therefore proceed to decide the question of law raised in these appeals upon the findings
of fact reached by the appellate tribunal.
section 42 of the act states as follows:
"all income, profits or gains accruing or arising whether directly or indirectly through
or from any money lent at interest and brought into the taxable territories in cash or
in kind shall be deemed to be income accruing or arising within the taxable territories
this section accordingly requires, in the first place, that any money should have been
lent at interest outside the taxable territory. in the second place, income, profits or
gains should accrue or arise directly or indirectly from such money so lent at interest,
and, in the third place, that the money should be brought into the taxable territories
in cash or in kind. if all these conditions are fulfilled, then the section lays it down
that the interest shall be deemed to be income accruing or arising within the taxable
territories. this section was the subject-matter of interpretation by the federal court
in a. h. wadia v.
commissioner of income-tax, bombay(2) it was held by the majority of the judges in that case that
the provision in s. 42(1) of the act, which brings within the scope of the charging section interest
earned out of money lent outside, but brought into, british india was not ultra vires the indian
legislature on the ground that it was extra- territorial in operation. it was pointed out that the
section contemplated the bringing of money into british india with the knowledge of the lender andthe commissioner of income-tax, ... vs sri meenakshi mills ltd. & ors on 25 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/503166/ 6borrower and this gave rise to a real territorial connection. the learned chief justice took the view
that the nexus was the knowledge to be attributed to the lender that the borrower had borrowed
money for the purpose of taking it into british india and earning income on that money. mukherjea
and mahajan, jj. took a somewhat different view. mahajan, j. considered that there must be an
arrangement between the lender and the borrower to bring the loan into british india, and
mukherjea, j. further emphasised the point by stating that it must be the basic arrangement
underlying the transaction that the money should be brought into british india after it is taken by
the borrower outside his territory. but all (1) 60 i.t.r. 52.
(2) 17 i.t.r. 63.
the learned judges agreed that the knowledge of the lender and the borrower that the money is to be
taken into british india must be an integral part of the transaction. that is the ratio of the decision
of the federal court with regard to the construction of s. 42(1) of the act. having examined the
findings of the appellate tribunal in the present case we are satisfied that the test prescribed by the
federal court in wadia's case(1) is fulfilled and the appellate tribunal was right in its conclusion
that there was a basic arrangement or scheme between the assessee- companies and the bank that
the money should be brought into british india after it was taken by the borrower outside the
taxable territory. the appellate tribunal has pointed out that the assessee-companies had a
preponderant, if not the whole, voice in the creation, running and management of the bank and that
pudukottai was neither a cotton producing area nor had it a market for cotton and except that it was
a non- taxable territory there was nothing else to recommend the carrying on of the cotton spinning
or weaving business there. the tribunal further remarked that having regard to the special position
of thyagaraja chettiar and the balance sheets of the bank and lack of investments in pudukottai, it
was reasonable to conclude that the bank itself was started at madurai and a branch was opened at
pudukottai only with a view to helping the financial operations of thyagaraja chettiar and the mills
in which he was vitally interested. the tribunal found that pudukottai branch of the bank had
transmitted funds deposited by the assessee-companies for enabling the madurai branch to advance
loans at interest to the assessee,companies and the transmission of the funds was made with the
knowledge of the assessee-companies who were the major shareholders of the bank. in the context
of these facts it must be held that the entire transactions formed part of a basic arrangement or
scheme between the creditor and the debtor that the money should be brought into british india
after it was taken by the borrower outside the taxable territory. we are accordingly of the opinion
that the principle laid down in wadia's(1) case is satisfied in this case and that the income-tax
authorities were right in holding that the entire interest earned on fixed deposits was taxable.
in the course of argument mr. venkataraman contended that even if thyagaraja chettiar, a director
of the assessee- companies, knew in his capacity as director of the madurai bank that money placed
in fixed deposit by the assessee- companies would be transferred to the taxable territory, that
knowledge cannot be imputed to the assessee-companies and so it cannot be said that the transfer
was part of an integral arrangement of the loan transaction. in support of this argument learned
counsel referred to the decision. of the court of appeal in david payne & co. ltd., in re. young v.
(1) 17 i.t.r. 63.the commissioner of income-tax, ... vs sri meenakshi mills ltd. & ors on 25 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/503166/ 7david payne & co. ltd.,(1) we are unable to accept the argument of the respondents as correct. the
decision in david payne & co's (1) case, has no bearing on the question presented for determination
in the present case. in david payne & co's (1) case, supra, the question at issue related to the powers
and duties of directors and it was held that because the same person is a common director of two
companies, the one company has not necessarily notice of everything that is within the knowledge of
the common director, which knowledge he has acquired as director of the other company. in the
present case the question at issue is entirely different. the appellate tribunal has, upon examination
of the evidence, found that the transference of funds from pudukottai to madurai was made as part
of the basic arrangement between the bank and the assessee- companies and that thyagaraja
chettiar who was the moving figure both in the bank and in each of the assessee- companies had
knowledge of this arrangement. it is well established that in a matter of this description the income-
tax authorities are entitled to pierce the veil of corporate entity and to look at the reality of the
transaction. it is true that from the juristic point of view the company is a legal personality entirely
distinct from its members and the company is capable of enjoying rights and being subjected to
duties which are not the same as those enjoyed or borne by its members. but in certain exceptional
cases the court is entitled to lift the veil of corporate entity and to pay regard to the economic
realities behind the legal facade. for example, the court has power to disregard the corporate entity
if it is used for tax evasion or to circumvent tax obligation. for instance, in apthorpe v. peter
schoenhofen brewing co.(2) the income tax commissioners had found as a fact that all the
property of the new york company, except its land, had been transferred to an english company,
and that the new york company had only been kept in being to hold the land, since aliens were not
allowed to do so under new york law. all but three of the new york company's shares were held by
the english company, and as the com- missioners also found, if the business was technically that of
the new york company, the latter was merely the agent of the english company. in the light of these
findings the court of appeal, despite the argument based on salomon's(3) case, held that the new
york business was that of the english company which was liable for english income tax accordingly.
in another case-firestone tyre and rubber co. v. llewellin(4)--an american company had an
arrangement with its distributors on the continent of europe -whereby they obtained supplies from
the english manufacturers, its wholly owned subsidiary. the english company credited the
american with the price received after deducting the costs plus 5 (1) [1904] 2 ch. d. 608.
(3) [1897] a.c. 22.
(2) 4 t.c. 41.
(4) [1957] 1 w.l.r. 464.
per cent. it was conceded that the subsidiary was a separate legal entity and not a mere emanation
of the american parent, and that it was selling its own goods as principal and not its parent's goods
as agent. nevertheless, these sales were a means whereby the american company carried on its
european business, and it was held that the substance of the arrangement was that the american
company traded in england through the agency of its subsidiary. we, therefore, reject the argument
of mr. venkataraman on this aspect of the case.the commissioner of income-tax, ... vs sri meenakshi mills ltd. & ors on 25 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/503166/ 8for the reasons expressed we hold that the question referred to the high court by the appellate
tribunal must be answered in favour of the income-tax department and against the respective
assessee-companies and these appeals must be allowed with costs.
y.p.
appeals allowed.the commissioner of income-tax, ... vs sri meenakshi mills ltd. & ors on 25 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/503166/ 9