supreme court of india
rm. ar., ar. rm. ar. ramanathan ... vs commissioner of income-tax, ... on 27 october, 1966
equivalent citations: 1967 air 657, 1967 scr (1) 965
author: v ramaswami
bench: ramaswami, v.
           petitioner:
rm. ar., ar.  rm.  ar.  ramanathan chettiar
        vs.
respondent:
commissioner of income-tax, madras
date of judgment:
27/10/1966
bench:
ramaswami, v.
bench:
ramaswami, v.
shah, j.c.
bhargava, vishishtha
citation:
 1967 air  657            1967 scr  (1) 965
act:
income-tax  act  (11 of 1922),  s.  4(3)(vii)-interest  under
decree  whether  capital receipt or income  of  a  recurring
nature--casual  receipt what is-jurisdiction of  high  court
hearing reference under s. 65 limits.
headnote:
on  the  death of two male members of a family  which  owned
extensive  properties  in india and ceylon,  disputes  arose
between their widows and a suit was filed for partition-  of
the  estate.  when each of the two members died, the  estate
duty  authorities  of ceylon levied estate  duty.   the  re-
ceivers  appointed  in the partition suit  paid  the  estate
duties  under  protest  and filed  a  suit  questioning  the
validity  of  the duties.  the suit -was  dismissed  by  the
trial  court but was decreed by the supreme court of  ceylon
on  appeal.  in consequence of the decision of  the  supreme
court  of ceylon, confirmed by the judicial  committee,  the
estate  duty  authorities  had to  refund  the  estate  duty
collected  with interest thereon.  the partition suit  ended
in a compromise and the assessee (the appellant's branch  of
the  family)  took one third share of the estate.   for  the
assessment  year 1958-59, the total income of  the  assesseerm. ar., ar. rm. ar. ramanathan ... vs commissioner of income-tax, ... on 27 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1403810/ 1was  assessed  and it included the amount  received  by  the
assessee  as  its share of the interest paid by  the  estate
duty  authorities of ceylon.  the assessee objected  to  the
inclusion of that amount, but the department, the  appellate
tribunal and the high court on a reference, held against the
assessee.
in appeal to this court,
held  :  (1)  the interest paid to the  assessee  under  the
decree  of  the  supreme court of ceylon on  the  amount  of
estate duty directed to be refunded was income liable to  be
taxed  under  the  indian income-tax act, and  there  is  no
warrant  for treating the amount as a capital receipt  being
in  the nature of damages for wrongful retention  of  money.
the supreme court of ceylon ordered the refund of the estate
duty with legal interest thereon; under s. 192 of the ceylon
ordinance ii of 1889, and the expression "interest" in  that
section should be given its natural meaning. [969 e, f;  970
b]
dr.   shamlal narula v. c.i.t., punjab [1964] 7 s.c.r.  668,
followed.
(2)  the receipt was not of a casual or non-recurring nature
(i)  it  is true that the assessee received the amount as  a
lump-sum payment.  but that does not mean, that the  receipt
is  not  of a recurring nature.  the  interest  was  granted
under  the decree of the court from the date of  institution
of  the  proceedings in the trial court and  was  calculated
upon  the footing that it accrued de die in diem  and  hence
has the essential quality of recurrence which is  sufficient
to bring it within the scope of the act. [971 f-h]
(ii) a receipt of interest which is foreseen and anticipated
cannot be regarded as casual even if it not likely to  recur
again.  when the action was commenced it was well within the
contemplation  and anticipation of the  receivers-plaintiffs
that a successful termination of the action would not merely
result in a decree for the estate duty illegally  collected,
but would also make the defendants liable to pay interest on
that amount. [972 a-b]
966
(3)  it  is of the essence of the jurisdiction of  the  high
court under s. 66  of the act, that in hearing a  reference,
it  can  decide only questions which are referred to  it  or
arise out of the order of the tribunal. [972 h]
c.i.t., bombay v. scindia steam navigation co. ltd. [1962] 1
s.c.r. 788, followed
judgment:
civil appellate jurisdiction : civil appeal no. 728 of 1965. appeal by special leave from the
judgment and order dated september 24, 1962 of the madras high court in t.c. no. 144 of 1960.rm. ar., ar. rm. ar. ramanathan ... vs commissioner of income-tax, ... on 27 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1403810/ 2a.k. sen and r. ganapathy iyer, for the appellant. sen, a.n. kirpal and r.n. sachthey, for the
respondent. the judgment of the court was delivered by ramaswami j. this appeal is brought by
special leave on behalf of ramanathan chettiar (herinafter called the 'assessee') from the judgment
of the high court of madras dated september 24, 1962 in t.c. no. 144 of 1960. arunachalam
chettiar (senior) was a resident of devakottai, ramanathapuram district who owned extensive
properties in- cluding properties in ceylon. he married three wives viz., valami achi, lakshimi achi
and nachiar achi. valami achi died in 1913 leaving behind her a son arunachalam chettiar (junior)
and three daughters. lakshimi achi and nachiar achi did not have natural born sons. arunachalam
chettiar (junior) died july 9, 1934. arunachalam chettiar (senior) died on february 23, 1938. he
was survived by his two widows lakshimi achi and nachiar achi and by the widow of his
predeceased son, arunachalam chettiar (junior) viz., umayal achi. after the death of arunachalam
chettiar (senior) disputes arose between his two widows and the widow of arunachalam chettiar
(junior) umayal achi, in respect of the estate of arunachalam chettiar (senior). umayal achi filed
o.s. no. 93 of 1938 in the subordinate judge's court of devakottai for administration and partition
of the estate of deceased arunachalam chettiar (senior). she claimed a half-share in the properties
under the provisions of the hindu women's rights to property act. during the pendency of the suit
the subordinate judge appointed two advocates as receivers for the administration of the estate.
on the death of arunachalam chettiar (junior) the estate duty authorities of ceylon levied estate
duty on what was described as the "deceased's half -share of the assets of the business carried on by
the family in ceylon". estate duty was also levied on the death of arunachalam chettiar (senior) in
1938. the two advocate receivers who were administering the estate paid under protest to the
commissioner of estate duty in ceylon the estate duty claimed from them. the administrators
subsequently filed a suit in the court of the district judge, colombo questioning the validity of the
estate duties. the district judge upheld the levies, but the supreme court of ceylon allowed the
appeal of the administrators and ordered the refund of the estate duty together with interest. the
attorney-general of ceylon took the matter in appeal to the judicial committee in p.c.a. nos. 16
and 17 of 1955. by its judgment dated july 10, 1957 the judicial committee affirmed the judgment
of the supreme court of ceylon and dismissed the appeals. in consequence of this decision the
estate duty authorities of ceylon bad to refund a sum of rs. 7,97,072/- as interest payable on the
amount of estate duty formerly collected. meanwhile, the litigation in o.s. 93 of 1938 filed in the
subordinate judge's court of devakottai had also reached the judicial committee and at that stage
the parties compromised. in pursuance of this compromise the two widows of arunachalam chettiar
(senior) took a boy each in adoption on june 17, 1945, lakshmi achi taking in adoption one
arunachalam chettiar and nachiar achi taking in adoption one ramanathan chettiar. the widow of
arunachalam chettiar (junior) umayal achi also adopted a son to her deceased husband, a boy
called veerappa chettiar on june 17, 1945. the estate was divided into three equal shares, lakshimi
achi and her adopted son taking one-third share nachiar achi and her adopted son taking another
one-third share, and umayal achi and her adopted son veerappa taking the balance of one-third
share.
ramanathan, the adopted son of arunachalam chettiar (senior) taken in adoption by nachiar achi
was assessed to income-tax for the assessment year 1958-59, the relevant previous year being the
year ending march 31, 1958. he was assessed in the status of a hindu undivided family on a total
income of rs. 2,53,828/- and a total tax of rs. 1,79,412-12 np was levied. the assessment included arm. ar., ar. rm. ar. ramanathan ... vs commissioner of income-tax, ... on 27 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1403810/ 3sum of rs. 1,93,328/- which was received by the assessee as his share of the amount of interest paid
by the estate duty authorities of ceylon consequent to the judgment of the supreme court of
ceylon ordering the refund of the amount. the assessee objected to the inclusion of this amount on
the ground that it was not a revenue receipt assessable to income-tax and that, in any event, the
receipt was of a casual and non- recurring nature falling within the exemption under s. 4(3)
(vii) of the indian incometax act, 1922 (hereinafter referred to as the act). the incometax officer
overruled the objection and his order was affirmed in appeal by the appellate assistant
commissioner and by the appellate tribunal. before the appellate tribunal the assessee contended
that the amount of rs. 1,93,328/- received from the estate duty authorities, ceylon was not income,
but was only damages received for the unlawful retention of money, and even assuming that it was a
revenue receipt, it was of a casual and non- recurring nature and, therefore, was not liable to
assessment. the contentions of the assessee were over-ruled by the appellate tribunal. at the
instance of the assessee the appellate tribunal referred the following questions of law to the high
court :
"1. whether the aforesaid interest receipt constitutes income ?
2. if so, whether it is exempt under  s. 4(3) (vii) , of the income-tax act as a receipt of
a casual and nonrecurring nature ?"
by its judgment dated september 24, 1962 the high court an- swered the reference against the
assessee and held that the receipt in question was a revenue receipt and could not be held to be
receipt of a casual and non-recurring nature and the amount was rightly assessed in the year of
assessment. the first question to be considered in this appeal is whether the amount of rs.
1,93,328/- received by the assessee as his one-third share of the amount of interest paid by the
estate duty authorities of ceylon can be taxed as income. it was contended on behalf of the
appellant. that the amount constituted damages for unlawful retention of money by the estate duty
authorities of ceylon and the amount received by the assessee was therefore, capital receipt. we do
not think there is any justification for this argument. the amount was paid by the ceylon estate
duty authorities under the. judgment and decree of the supreme court of ceylon the relevant
portion of which reads as follows :
"i would therefore, set aside the order under appeal and substitute a decree (a)
declaring that no estate duty was -payable under estate duty ordinance (cap. 187)
in respect of the estate of arunachalam chettiar (senior) and
(b) ordering the crown to refund to the appellants the sum of rs. 7,00,402.65 with
legal interest thereon from the date on which these proceedings were instituted in the
district court. the appellants are also entitled to -their costs in this court and in the
court below".
under the provisions of the estate duty act of ceylon, as it stood at the material time, any person
aggrieved by the assessment of estate duty could appeal to the appropriate district court naming therm. ar., ar. rm. ar. ramanathan ... vs commissioner of income-tax, ... on 27 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1403810/ 4attorney-general as the respondent. after the attorney-general is served in the matter the appeal is
proceeded with as an action between the assessee as plaintiff and the crown as defendant. the
statute specifically provides that the provisions of the civil procedure code and of the stamp
ordinance shall apply to the proceedings. the petition of appeal should be stamped as though it
were a plaint filed for the purpose of originating the action, and if it is not stamped with the
requisite stamps it may be dealt with in the same manner as if it is a plaint which is insufficiently
stamped. any party aggrieved by any decree or order of the district court may further appeal to the
supreme court in accordance with the provisions of the civil procedure code. the relevant
provision under the ceylon civil procedure code empowering the court to award interest is
contained in s. 192 of ordinance 11 of 1889 which is to the following effect:
"when the action is for a sum of money due to the plaintiff, the court may in the
decree order interest according to the rate agreed on between the parties by the
instrument sued on, or in the absence of any such agreement at the rate of nine per
cent per annum to be paid on the principal sum adjudged from the date of the action
to the date of the decree, in addition to any interest adjudged on such principal sum,
for any period prior to the institution of the action, with further interest at such rate
on the aggregate sum so adjudged from the date of the decree to the date of payment,
or to such earlier date as the court thinks fit..........."
this provision corresponds to s. 34 of the civil procedure code in india. section 192 of the ceylon
ordinance ii of 1889 expressly uses the word 'interest' in contrast to 'principal sum adjudged' and
we do not see any reason why the expression should not be given the natural meaning it bears. in its
judgment dated october 12, 1953, the supreme court of ceylon acted under this section and ordered
the crown to refund to the appellant the sum of rs. 7,00,402.65 with legal interest thereon from the
date of the institution of the proceedings in the district court. we see no warrant for accepting the
submission of the appellant that the interest awarded by the supreme court of ceylon under s. 192
of ordinance 11 of 1889 should be taken to be a capital receipt being in the nature of damages for
wrongful retention of money. in westminster bank, ltd. v. riches,(1) the question at issue was
whether the amount of interest awarded by the court in exercise of its discretionary power under s.
3 of the law reform (miscellaneous provisions) act, 1934 was-'interest of money' within the
meaning of sch. 'd' and general rule 21 of the income-tax act, 1918 and whether incometax was
accordingly deductible therefrom. it was contended in that case on behalf of the respondent that the
amount though awarded under a power to add interest to the amount of debt and though called
interest in the judgment, was not really interest such as attracts income-tax but was damages. this
argument was rejected by the house of lords and it was held that there was no incompatibility
between the two conceptions and that the amount (1) 28 t.c. 159.
117 sup. c. 1.166-17 was taxable as interest of money within sch. 'd' and general rule 21 of the
income-tax act, 1918. it was pointed out that the real question in cases of this type was not whether
the amount received was interest proper or damages but whether it had the quality of income or it
was a capital sum estimated in terms of interest. in the course of his judgment, lord wright
observed at page 189 of the report as follows:rm. ar., ar. rm. ar. ramanathan ... vs commissioner of income-tax, ... on 27 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1403810/ 5"the contention of the appellant may be summarily stated to be that the award under
the act cannot be held to be interest in the true sense of that word because it is not
interest but damages, that is, damages for the detention of a sum of money due by the
respondent to the appellant, and hence the deduction made as being required under
rule 21 is not justified because the money was not interest. in other words the
contention is that money awarded as damages for the detention of money is not
interest and has not the quality of interest. evershed, j., in his admirable judgment
rejected that distinction. the appellant's contention is in any case artificial and is, in
my opinion, erroneous, because, the essence of interest is that it is a payment which
becomes due because the creditor has not had his money at the due date. it may be
regarded either as representing the profit he might have made if he had had the use
of the money, or conversely the loss he suffered because he had not that use. the
general idea is that he is entitled to compensation for the deprivation. from that
point of view it would seem immaterial whether the money was due to him under a
contract express or implied, or a statute, or whether the money was due for any other
reason in law. in either case the money was due to him and was not paid or, in other
words, was withheld from him by the debtor after the time when payment should
have been made, in breach of his legal rights, and interest was a compensation,
whether the compensation was liquidated under an agreement or statute, as for
instance under section 57 of the bills of exchange act, 1882, or was unliquidated and
claimable under the act as in the present case. the essential quality of the claim for
compensation is the same, and the compensation is properly described as interest."
this passage was quoted with approval by this court in dr. shamlal narula v. commissioner of
income-tax punjab, jammu & kashmir, himachal pradesh and patiala(1) in which a question arose
whether the statutory interest paid under s. 34 of the land acquisition act, 1894, on the amount of
compensation awarded for the period from the date the collector has taken possession of land
compulsorily (1) [1964] 7 s.c.r. 668 : 53 i.t.r. 151.
acquired is interest paid for the delayed payment of the compensation and is therefore a revenue
receipt liable to tax under the act. it was held that the amount was not compensation for land
acquired or for depriving the claimant of his right to possession but was paid to the claimant for the
use of his money by the state and the statutory interest paid was, therefore, a revenue receipt liable
to incometax. the principle of this decision applies to the present case also and we are of opinion
that the interest paid to the assessee under the decree of the supreme court of ceylon on the
amount of estate duty directed to be refunded was income liable to be taxed under the act.
we shall proceed to consider the next question whether the receipt of interest, even if it constituted
income, was exempt under s. 4(3) (vii) of the act as receipt of a casual and non-recurring nature.
section 4(3)(vii) of the act is in the following terms:
"4. (3). any income, profits or gains falling within the following classes shall not be
included in the total income of the person receiving them:rm. ar., ar. rm. ar. ramanathan ... vs commissioner of income-tax, ... on 27 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1403810/ 6(vii) any receipts not being capital gains chargeable according to the provisions of
section 12b and not being receipts arising from business or the exercise of a
profession vocation or occupation, which are of a casual and non-recurring nature, or
are not by way of addition to the remuneration of an employee."
it was argued on behalf of the appellant that the amount in question was a lump-sum payment
awarded under the decree of the court and there was no quality of recurrence about it. we do not
think that this submission is correct. it is true that the appellant received lump-sum payment on
account of interest. that does not, however, necessarily mean that the amount of interest is not a
receipt of a recurring nature. on the other hand, the interest was granted under the decree of the
court from the date of the institution of the proceedings in the district court and was calculated
upon the footing that it accrued de die in diem, and hence it has the essential quality of recurrence
which is sufficient to bring it within the scope of the act. it was also contended that the receipt of
interest was casual in its character. the expression 'casual' has not been defined in the act and must
therefore be construed in its plain and ordinary sense. according to the shorter oxford english
dictionary the word 'casual' is defined to mean:
"(i) subject to or produced by chance; accidental, fortuitous, (ii) coming at uncertain times; not to
be calculated on, unsettled". a receipt of interest which is forseen and anticipated cannot be
regarded as casual even if it is not likely to recur again. when the action was commenced by way of a
petition in the district court of ceylon, it was well within the contemplation and anticipation of the
persons representing the estate that a successful termination of the action would not merely result
in a decree for the tax illegally collected, but would also make the crown liable to pay interest on
that amount from the date of the petition till the date of the payment. the receipt of interest in the
present case by virtue of the decree of the supreme court of ceylon bears no semblance, therefore,
to a receipt of a casual character. it is not therefore possible to accept the argument of the appellant
that the receipt of interest obtained under the decree of the supreme court of ceylon was of a casual
or non-recurring nature. we accordingly reject the submission of the appellant on this aspect of the
case.
it was lastly submitted on behalf of the appellant that the payment of interest . under the decree of
the supreme court of ceylon was made by the ceylon estate duty authorities to the estate of
arunachalam chettiar (senior) and what was received by the appellant for his one-third share,
namely, rs. 1,93,328/- was a share in the estate of the deceased and therefore was received by the
appellant as part of the estate. in other words, the contention of the appellant was that the receipt
was a capital receipt and was not assessable in his hands. it is not, however, open to the appellant to
advance this argument at this stage because the question did not arise out of the order of the
tribunal and no such question ;was referred by the appellate tribunal for the decision of the high
court. mr. a. k. sen for the appellant also referred to the decision of the madras high court in
commissioner of revenue, madras v. veerappa chettiar(1) which dealt with a share of the same
income by another branch of the family. it was decided by the madras high ,court in that case that
the receipt of interest prior to february 17, 1947 should be regarded as capital and the rest should be
regarded :as income receipt. but the question of the disruption of the status of joint family on
february 17, 1947 and the effect of that disruption upon the character of the interest receipt wasrm. ar., ar. rm. ar. ramanathan ... vs commissioner of income-tax, ... on 27 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1403810/ 7never raised before the appellate tribunal and was not decided by it in the appeal before us. in
commissioner of income-tax, bombay v. scindia steam navigation co. ltd.(2) it was pointed out by
this court that in hearing a reference under s. 66 of the act the high court acts purely in an advisory
capacity, and it is of the essence of such a jurisdiction that the court can decide only questions which
are referred to it and not any other questions. in the present case, the high court has rightly (1) 61
i.t.r.256.
(2) [1962] 1 s.c.r. 788 :42 i.t.r. 589.
pointed out that the question did not arise out of the, order of the tribunal and was not the
subject-matter of reference to the high court.
for the reasons already expressed we hold that the judgment of the high court is right and this
appeal must be dismissed with costs.
v.p.s.                                  appeal dismissed.rm. ar., ar. rm. ar. ramanathan ... vs commissioner of income-tax, ... on 27 october, 1966
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1403810/ 8