supreme court of india
commissioner of income-tax, ... vs a. raman & company on 18 july, 1967
equivalent citations: 1968 air 49, 1969 scr (1) 10
author: s c.
bench: shah, j.c.
           petitioner:
commissioner of income-tax, gujarat
        vs.
respondent:
a.   raman & company
date of judgment:
18/07/1967
bench:
shah, j.c.
bench:
shah, j.c.
sikri, s.m.
ramaswami, v.
citation:
 1968 air   49            1969 scr  (1)  10
 citator info :
 rf         1972 sc  29  (4)
 e          1973 sc2330  (13)
 f          1974 sc1358  (10)
 rf         1975 sc 703  (11)
 afr        1976 sc 203  (1,4,12,15,16)
 f          1977 sc 757  (31)
 rf         1977 sc2129  (12)
 r          1979 sc1960  (6,14)
 rf         1986 sc 649  (16,47)
 rf         1986 sc1853  (19,21)
act:
indian  income-tax  act,  1961, s.  147-conditions  for  the
exercise of power to re-open assessment.
constitution  of india, 1950, art. 226-powers of high  court
to  issue  writ when income-tax  officer's  jurisdiction  to
issue notice under s. 147 of the indian income-tax act, 1961
is questioned-high court must not re-appraise evidence.
headnote:
the  assessee  firm  consisted  of  two  partners  who  were
managers of their respective hindu undivided families.   the
firm  sold  its  goods to the  aforesaid  families  and  thecommissioner of income-tax, ... vs a. raman & company on 18 july, 1967
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/839441/ 1families  again  sold the goods on their  own  account.   in
income-tax  proceedings for the years 1959-60,  1960-61  and
1961-62  the  firm  and the hindu  undivided  families  were
separately   assessed   in   respect   of   their   incomes.
subsequently  the income-tax authorities took view that  the
sale of goods by the firm to the families was only a  device
to  divert the profits of the firm and on this  view  issued
notices  under s. 147 of the incometax act,  1961  requiring
the assessee to show cause why the assessments for the years
1959-60,  1960-61 and 1961-62 should not be  reopened.   the
high  court of gujarat in a petition for a writ  under  art.
226 of the constitution quashed those notices and restrained
the income-tax officer from taking proceedings in  pursuance
thereof.   with  special leave granted by  this  court,  the
revenue appealed.
held:(i)  the high court may issue a  high  prerogative
writ prohibiting the income-tax officer from proceeding with
reassessment when it appears that the income-tax officer had
no   jurisdiction  to  commence  proceedings   because   the
conditions precedent do not exist. [12g-h; 13b-c]
calcutta discount co. ltd. v. income-tax officer,  companies
district 1, calcutta, & anr. 41 i.t.r. 191, followed.
it  is however not open to the high court exercising  powers
under  art.  226  to  set aside or  vacate  the  notice  for
reassessment by itself re-appraising the evidence. [15b]
(ii)the condition which invests the income-tax officer with
jurisdiction  has  two  branches: (i)  that  the  income-tax
officer has reason to believe that income chargeable to  tax
has  escaped assessment; and (ii) that it is in  consequence
of  information which he has in his possession and  that  he
has  reason so to believe.  the expression 'information'  in
the  context  of which it occurs must  mean  instruction  or
knowledge  derived from an external source concerning  facts
or particulars, or as to law relating to a matter bearing on
the  assessment.  if he has such information the  income-tax
officer may commence proceedings under s. 147(1)(b).  but to
commence  such a proceeding it is not necessary that on  the
materials  which  came  to  the  notice  of  the  income-tax
officer,  the previous order of assessment was  vitiated  by
some error of fact or law. [13c-g]
(iii)in the present case however the pre-conditions for
the  issue of a notice of re-assessment did not exist.   the
law does not oblige a trader to make the maximum profit that
he can out of his
11
trading  transactions.  income which accrues to a trader  is
taxable  in his hands: income which he could have,  but  has
not  earned  is not made taxable as income accrued  to  him.
avoidance  of  tax  liability  by  so  arranging  commercial
affairs that charge of tax is distributed is not prohibited.
[15d-g]commissioner of income-tax, ... vs a. raman & company on 18 july, 1967
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/839441/ 2judgment:
civil appellate jurisdiction: civil appeal no. 768 of 1966. appeal by special leave from the
judgment and order dated december 18, 1964 of the gujarat high court in special civil application
no. 332 of 1964.
b.sen, s. k. a iyar, r. n. sachthey and s. p. nayar, for the appellant.
s. t. desai and 0. c. mathur, for the respondent. the judgment of the court was delivered by shah,
j.-the assessees--m/s a. raman & company-are dealers in "mill stores" in the course of their
business they sell " mill stores" to other dealers including two concerns trading in the names of m/s
a. m. shah & co. and m/s r. ambalal & co., which are owned by the hindu undivided families,
managers of which are the only partners of the assessees. for the assessment years 1959-60,
1960-61 and 1961-62 the assessees were originally assessed by the income-tax officer, circle-1,
ward-a, ahmedabad, while the partners of the assessees and the hindu undivided families which
traded in the names of m / s a. m. shah & co. and m / s r. ambalal & co. were assessed by
income-tax officers in other circles. the cases of assessees, of the partners of the assessees and of
the two hindu undivided families trading in the names of a. m. shah & co. and r. ambalal & co.
were later transferred to the income-tax officer, group circle-j, ahmedabad. that officer by letter
dated march 20, 1964 informed the assessees that he was convinced from a perusal of the
assessment records of the assessees, their partners and their individual hindu undivided families,
that the partners of the assessees had contrived to divert profits of the assessees to their respective
hindu undivided families and had tried to "evade proper taxation", and on that ground he called
upon the assessees to submit their objections, if any, to the reopening of the assessments for the
years 1959- 60, 1960-61 and 1961-62. the assessees in reply contended that the income-tax officer
had no jurisdiction to reopen the assessments since the hindu undivided families of the two
partners and the assessees had submitted "effect and complete returns of income" supported by
their books of account, "quantity details" of purchases, sales and expenses, and had given all
material facts and relevant information necessary for assessment at the time of each assessment.
the income-tax officer issued three separate notices under s. 147 of the income-tax act, 1961,
requiring the assessees to show cause why the assessments for the years 1959-60, 1960-61 and
1961-62 should not be reopened. the high court of gujarat in a petition for a, writ under art. 226 of
the constitution quashed those notices and restrained the income-tax officer from taking
proceedings in pursuance thereof. with special leave granted by this court, the commissioner of
income-tax has appealed to this court. in support of the claim of the income-tax officer, to reopen
the assessments, reliance was placed in the high court on cl. (b) of s. 147 (1), of the income-tax act,
1961. the material part of s. 147(1)(b) may be read:
"if-
(a)commissioner of income-tax, ... vs a. raman & company on 18 july, 1967
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/839441/ 3(b)notwithstanding that there has been no omission or failure as mentioned in clause
(a) on the part of the assessee, the income-tax officer has in consequence of
information in his possession reason to believe that income chargeable to tax has
escaped assessment for any assessment year, he may, subject to the provisions of
sections 148 to 153, assess or reassess such income or recompute the loss or the
depreciation allowance as the case may be, for the assessment year concerned.
explanation 1-for the purposes of this section, the following shall also be deemed to
be cases where income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment, namely:-
(a) where income chargeable to tax has been underassessed; or * * * * *"
under s. 147(1)(b) reason to believe that income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment in
consequence of information in the possession of the income-tax officer is a condition precedent to
the exercise of his jurisdiction to assess or reassess the income of the assessee. if that condition does
not exist, steps taken by the income-tax officer to assess or reassess the income will be without
jurisdiction. it was held by this court in calcutta discount co. ltd. v. income-tax officer,
companies district i, calcutta & another(1) that the high court in appropriate cases has power to
issue an order prohibiting the income-tax officer from proceeding to reassess the income when the
conditions precedent do not exist. at p. 207, k. c. das gupta, j., delivering the majority judgment of
the court observed:
"it is well-settled however that though the writ of prohibition or certiorari will not
issue against an executive authority, the high courts have power to issue in a fit case
an order prohibiting an executive authority from acting without jurisdiction. where
such action of an exe- cutive authority acting without jurisdiction subjects or is likely
to subject a person to lengthy proceedings and unnecessary harassment, the high
courts, it is well settl- ed, will issue appropriate orders or directions to prevent such
consequences".
the high court may, therefore, issue a high prerogative writ prohibiting the income-tax officer
from proceeding with re- assessment when it appears that the income-tax officer had no
jurisdiction to commence proceeding.
the condition which invests the income-tax officer with jurisdiction has two branches: (i) that the
income-tax officer has reason to believe that income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment; and
(ii) that it is in consequence of information which he has in his possession and that he has reason so
to believe. since the learned judges of the high court have concentrated their attention upon the
second branch of the condition and have reached their conclusion in favour of the assessees on that
branch, it would be appropriate to deal with the correctness of that approach. the expression
"information" in the context in which it occurs must, in our judgment, mean instruction or
knowledge derived from an external source concerning facts or particulars, or as to law relating to a
matter bearing on the assessment. if as a result of information in his possession, the income-tax
officer has reason to believe that income chargeable to tax had escaped assessment, the income-taxcommissioner of income-tax, ... vs a. raman & company on 18 july, 1967
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/839441/ 4officer has jurisdiction to assess or reassess income under  s. 147(1)(b) of the income-tax act, 1961.
information in his possession that income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment furnishes a
starting point for assessing or reassessing income. if he has that information, the income-tax officer
may commence proceedings for assessment or reassessment. to commence the proceeding for
reassessment it is not necessary that on the materials which came to the notice of the income-tax
officer, the pre- vious order of assessment was vitiated by some error of fact or law.
the high court exercising jurisdiction under art. 226 of the constitution has power to set aside a,
notice issued under s. 147 of the income-tax act, 1961, if the condition precedent to the exercise of
the jurisdiction does not exist. the court may, in exercise of its powers, ascertain whether the
income-tax officer had in his possession any information: the court may also determine whether
from that information the income-tax officer may have reason to believe that income chargeable to
tax had escaped assessment. but the jurisdiction of the court extends no further. whether on the
information in his possession he should commence a proceeding, for assessment or reassessment,
must be decided by the income-tax officer and not by the high court. the incometax officer alone
is entrusted with the power to administer the act: if he has information from which it may be said,
prima facie, that lie had reason to believe that income chargeable to tax had escaped assessment, it
is not open to the high court, exercising powers under art. 226 of the constitution, to set aside or
vacate the notice for reassessment on a re-appraisal of the evidence. the high court in this case was
apparently of the view that the information in consequence of which proceedings for reassessment
were intended to be started, could have been gathered by the income-tax officer in charge of the
assessment in the previous years from the disclosures made by the two hindu undivided families.
but that, in our judgment, is wholly irrelevant. justification of the income-tax officer to reassess
income arises if he has in consequence of information in his possession reason to believe that
income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment. that information, must, it is true, have come into
the possession of the income-tax officer after the previous assessment, but even if the information
be such that it could have been obtained during the previous assessment from an investigation of the
materials on the record, or the facts disclosed thereby or from other enquiry or research into facts or
law, but was not in fact obtained, the jurisdiction of the income-tax officer is not affected. the high
court was also of the view that the inference raised by the income-tax officer that the hindu
undivided families of the assessees had made profit by sale of articles purchased from the assessees
larger than the profit which the assessees had made, was not justified, since there was no evidence
on the record about the price at which similar goods were sold by the assessees to other merchants
and about the profit which those other merchants made by sale of those goods. but in a petition
under art. 226 of the constitution the taxpayer may challenge the validity of a notice under s. 147 of
the income-tax act, 1961, on the ground that either branch of the condition precedent does not exist,
but an investigation whether the inferences raised by the income-tax officer from the information
are "correct or proper" cannot be made. counsel for the commissioner is, therefore, right in
contending that the high court entered upon an investigation of matters which were not within
their competence.
but the appeal of the commissioner must still fail. the case of the commissioner on the materials
placed before the high court, suffers from a serious infirmity on the first branch of the jurisdictional
condition. the averments made in the affidavit filed by the income-tax officer in that behalf do notcommissioner of income-tax, ... vs a. raman & company on 18 july, 1967
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/839441/ 5establish the existence of that branch of the condition. in reply to the averment by the assessees that
the income-tax officer had no reason to believe that income had escaped assessment, the
income-tax officer stated:
"in the course of the discussions i had at the several meetings hereinabove referred, i
also learnt that in the earlier years also the petitioners (the assessees) had effected
such sales to the said hindu undivided families, and that over and above the margin
of profits earned by the petitioners (the assessees) from the hindu undivided
families, the hindu undivided families had earned substantial profits on the resale of
such goods. 1, therefore, came to the conclusion that the creation of the hindu
undivided family business was merely a subterfuge or a contrivance by the partners
of the petitioner firm (the assessees) to divert the huge profits made by the
petitioners (the asses- sees) on imported articles".
the plea raised by the income-tax officer is that income which could have been earned by the
assessees was not earned, and a part of that income was earned by the hindu undivided families.
that according to the income-tax officer was brought about by "a subterfuge or contrivance".
counsel for the commissioner contended that if by resorting to a "device or contrivance", income
which would normally have been earned by the assessee is divided between the assessee and another
person, the incometax officer would be entitled to bring the entire income to tax as if it had been
earned by him. but the law does not oblige a trader to make the maximum profit that he can out of
his trading transactions. income which accrues to a trader is taxable in his hands: income which he
could have, but has not earned, is not made taxable as income accrued to him. by adopting a device,
if it is made to appear that income which belonged to the assessee had been earned by some other
person, that income may be brought to tax in the hands of the assessee, and if the income has
escaped tax in a previous assessment a case for commencing a proceeding for reassessment under s.
147(1)(b) may be made out. avoidance of tax liability by so arranging commercial affairs that charge
of tax is distributed is not prohibited. a taxpayer may resort to a device to divert the income before it
accrues or arises to him. effectiveness of the device depends not upon considerations of morality,
but on the operation of the income-tax act. legislative injunction in taxing statutes may not. except
on peril of penalty, be violated, but it may lawfully be circumvented. if the goods were nominally
transferred to the hindu undivided families the latter acting merely as benamdars for the assessees,
and the profits were earning in truth by the assessees, income earned by sale of the goods by the
hindu undivided families may be held chargeable to tax as income which has escaped assessment to
tax in the hands of the assessees. in the present case,, no such case was attempted to be made out in
the affidavit filed by the income-tax officer. we hold, therefore, that on the materials on the record,
the income-tax officer. had no reason to believe that income chargeable to tax had escaped
assessment for the three years in question. the order passed by the high court is therefore
confirmed. there will, however, be no order as to costs in this court and the high court.
g.c.
appeal dismissed.commissioner of income-tax, ... vs a. raman & company on 18 july, 1967
indian kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/839441/ 6